I. Nature of President Clinton's Relationship with
Monica Lewinsky


A. Introduction

This Referral presents substantial and credible
information that President Clinton criminally
obstructed the judicial process, first in a sexual
harassment lawsuit in which he was the defendant and
then in a grand jury investigation. The opening section
of the Narrative provides an overview of the object of
the President's cover-up, the sexual relationship
between the President and Ms. Lewinsky. Subsequent
sections recount the evolution of the relationship
chronologically, including the sexual contacts, the
President's efforts to get Ms. Lewinsky a job,
Ms. Lewinsky's subpoena in Jones v. Clinton, the role
of Vernon Jordan, the President's discussions with
Ms. Lewinsky about her affidavit and deposition, the
President's deposition testimony in Jones, the
President's attempts to coach a potential witness in
the harassment case, the President's false and
misleading statements to aides and to the American
public after the Lewinsky story became public, and,
finally, the President's testimony before a federal
grand jury.

B. Evidence Establishing Nature of Relationship

1. Physical Evidence

Physical evidence conclusively establishes that the
President and Ms. Lewinsky had a sexual relationship.
After reaching an immunity and cooperation agreement
with the Office of the Independent Counsel on July 28,
1998, Ms. Lewinsky turned over a navy blue dress that
she said she had worn during a sexual encounter with
the President on February 28, 1997. According to Ms.
Lewinsky, she noticed stains on the garment the next
time she took it from her closet. From their location,
she surmised that the stains were the President's
semen.

Initial tests revealed that the stains are in fact
semen. Based on that result, the OIC asked the
President for a blood sample. After requesting and
being given assurances that the OIC had an evidentiary
basis for making the request, the President agreed. In
the White House Map Room on August 3, 1998, the White
House Physician drew a vial of blood from the President
in the presence of an FBI agent and an OIC attorney. By
conducting the two standard DNA comparison tests, the
FBI Laboratory concluded that the President was the
source of the DNA obtained from the dress. According to
the more sensitive RFLP test, the genetic markers on
the semen, which match the President's DNA, are
characteristic of one out of 7.87 trillion Caucasians.

In addition to the dress, Ms. Lewinsky provided what
she said were answering machine tapes containing brief
messages from the President, as well as several gifts
that the President had given her.

2. Ms. Lewinsky's Statements

Ms. Lewinsky was extensively debriefed about her
relationship with the President. For the initial
evaluation of her credibility, she submitted to a
detailed "proffer" interview on July 27, 1998. After
entering into a cooperation agreement, she was
questioned over the course of approximately 15
days. She also provided testimony under oath on three
occasions: twice before the grand jury, and, because of
the personal and sensitive nature of particular topics,
once in a deposition. In addition, Ms. Lewinsky worked
with prosecutors and investigators to create an 11-page
chart that chronologically lists her contacts with
President Clinton, including meetings, phone calls,
gifts, and messages. Ms. Lewinsky twice verified the
accuracy of the chart under oath.

In the evaluation of experienced prosecutors and
investigators, Ms. Lewinsky has provided truthful
information. She has not falsely inculpated the
President. Harming him, she has testified, is "the last
thing in the world I want to do."

Moreover, the OIC's immunity and cooperation agreement
with Ms. Lewinsky includes safeguards crafted to ensure
that she tells the truth. Court-ordered immunity and
written immunity agreements often provide that the
witness can be prosecuted only for false statements
made during the period of cooperation, and not for the
underlying offense. The OIC's agreement goes further,
providing that Ms. Lewinsky will lose her immunity
altogether if the government can prove to a federal
district judge -- by a preponderance of the evidence,
not the higher standard of beyond a reasonable doubt --
that she lied. Moreover, the agreement provides that,
in the course of such a prosecution, the United States
could introduce into evidence the statements made by
Ms.  Lewinsky during her cooperation. Since
Ms. Lewinsky acknowledged in her proffer interview and
in debriefings that she violated the law, she has a
strong incentive to tell the truth: If she did not, it
would be relatively straightforward to void the
immunity agreement and prosecute her, using her own
admissions against her.

3. Ms. Lewinsky's Confidants

Between 1995 and 1998, Ms. Lewinsky confided in 11
people about her relationship with the President. All
have been questioned by the OIC, most before a federal
grand jury: Andrew Bleiler, Catherine Allday Davis,
Neysa Erbland, Kathleen Estep, Deborah Finerman, Dr.
Irene Kassorla, Marcia Lewis, Ashley Raines, Linda
Tripp, Natalie Ungvari, and Dale Young. Ms. Lewinsky
told most of these confidants about events in her
relationship with the President as they occurred,
sometimes in considerable detail.

Some of Ms. Lewinsky's statements about the
relationship were contemporaneously memorialized. These
include deleted email recovered from her home computer
and her Pentagon computer, email messages retained by
two of the recipients, tape recordings of some of
Ms. Lewinsky's conversations with Ms. Tripp, and notes
taken by Ms.  Tripp during some of their
conversations. The Tripp notes, which have been
extensively corroborated, refer specifically to places,
dates, and times of physical contacts between the
President and Ms. Lewinsky.

Everyone in whom Ms. Lewinsky confided in detail
believed she was telling the truth about her
relationship with the President. Ms. Lewinsky told her
psychologist, Dr. Irene Kassorla, about the affair
shortly after it began. Thereafter, she related details
of sexual encounters soon after they occurred
(sometimes calling from her White House
office). Ms. Lewinsky showed no indications of
delusional thinking, according to Dr. Kassorla, and
Dr. Kassorla had no doubts whatsoever about the truth
of what Ms. Lewinsky told her. Ms. Lewinsky's friend
Catherine Allday Davis testified that she believed
Ms. Lewinsky's accounts of the sexual relationship with
the President because "I trusted in the way she had
confided in me on other things in her life. . . . I
just trusted the relationship, so I trusted her." Dale
Young, a friend in whom Ms. Lewinsky confided starting
in mid-1996, testified:

[I]f she was going to lie to me, she would have said to
me, "Oh, he calls me all the time. He does wonderful
things. He can't wait to see me." . . . [S]he would
have embellished the story. You know, she wouldn't be
telling me, "He told me he'd call me, I waited home all
weekend and I didn't do anything and he didn't call and
then he didn't call for two weeks."

4. Documents

In addition to her remarks and email to friends, Ms.
Lewinsky wrote a number of documents, including letters
and draft letters to the President. Among these
documents are (i) papers found in a consensual search
of her apartment; (ii) papers that Ms. Lewinsky turned
over pursuant to her cooperation agreement, including a
calendar with dates circled when she met or talked by
telephone with the President in 1996 and 1997; and
(iii) files recovered from Ms. Lewinsky's computers at
home and at the Pentagon.

5. Consistency and Corroboration

The details of Ms. Lewinsky's many statements have been
checked, cross-checked, and corroborated. When
negotiations with Ms. Lewinsky in January and February
1998 did not culminate in an agreement, the OIC
proceeded with a comprehensive investigation, which
generated a great deal of probative evidence.

In July and August 1998, circumstances brought more
direct and compelling evidence to the investigation.
After the courts rejected a novel privilege claim,
Secret Service officers and agents testified about
their observations of the President and Ms. Lewinsky in
the White House. Ms. Lewinsky agreed to submit to a
proffer interview (previous negotiations had deadlocked
over her refusal to do so), and, after assessing her
credibility in that session, the OIC entered into a
cooperation agreement with her. Pursuant to the
cooperation agreement, Ms. Lewinsky turned over the
dress that proved to bear traces of the President's
semen. And the President, who had spurned six
invitations to testify, finally agreed to provide his
account to the grand jury.  In that sworn testimony, he
acknowledged "inappropriate intimate contact" with
Ms. Lewinsky.

Because of the fashion in which the investigation had
unfolded, in sum, a massive quantity of evidence was
available to test and verify Ms. Lewinsky's statements
during her proffer interview and her later cooperation.
Consequently, Ms. Lewinsky's statements have been
corroborated to a remarkable degree. Her detailed
statements to the grand jury and the OIC in 1998 are
consistent with statements to her confidants dating
back to 1995, documents that she created, and physical
evidence. Moreover, her accounts generally match the
testimony of White House staff members; the testimony
of Secret Service agents and officers; and White House
records showing Ms. Lewinsky's entries and exits, the
President's whereabouts, and the President's telephone
calls.

C. Sexual Contacts

1. The President's Accounts

a. Jones Testimony

In the Jones deposition on January 17, 1998, the
President denied having had "a sexual affair," "sexual
relations," or "a sexual relationship" with Ms.
Lewinsky. He noted that "[t]here are no curtains on the
Oval Office, there are no curtains on my private
office, there are no curtains or blinds that can close
[on] the windows in my private dining room," and added:
"I have done everything I could to avoid the kind of
questions you are asking me here today. . . ."

During the deposition, the President's attorney, Robert
Bennett, sought to limit questioning about
Ms. Lewinsky.  Mr. Bennett told Judge Susan Webber
Wright that Ms.  Lewinsky had executed "an affidavit
which [Ms. Jones's lawyers] are in possession of saying
that there is absolutely no sex of any kind in any
manner, shape or form, with President Clinton." In a
subsequent colloquy with Judge Wright, Mr. Bennett
declared that as a result of "preparation of [President
Clinton] for this deposition, the witness is fully
aware of Ms. Lewinsky's affidavit." The President did
not dispute his legal representative's assertion that
the President and Ms.  Lewinsky had had "absolutely no
sex of any kind in any manner, shape or form," nor did
he dispute the implication that Ms. Lewinsky's
affidavit, in denying "a sexual relationship," meant
that there was "absolutely no sex of any kind in any
manner, shape or form." In subsequent questioning by
his attorney, President Clinton testified under oath
that Ms. Lewinsky's affidavit was "absolutely true."

b. Grand Jury Testimony

Testifying before the grand jury on August 17, 1998,
seven months after his Jones deposition, the President
acknowledged "inappropriate intimate contact" with Ms.
Lewinsky but maintained that his January deposition
testimony was accurate. In his account, "what began as
a friendship [with Ms. Lewinsky] came to include this
conduct." He said he remembered "meeting her, or having
my first real conversation with her during the
government shutdown in November of '95." According to
the President, the inappropriate contact occurred later
(after Ms. Lewinsky's internship had ended), "in early
1996 and once in early 1997."

The President refused to answer questions about the
precise nature of his intimate contacts with Ms.
Lewinsky, but he did explain his earlier denials. As to
his denial in the Jones deposition that he and Ms.
Lewinsky had had a "sexual relationship," the President
maintained that there can be no sexual relationship
without sexual intercourse, regardless of what other
sexual activities may transpire. He stated that "most
ordinary Americans" would embrace this distinction.

The President also maintained that none of his sexual
contacts with Ms. Lewinsky constituted "sexual
relations" within a specific definition used in the
Jones deposition. Under that definition:

[A] person engages in "sexual relations" when the
person knowingly engages in or causes -- (1) contact
with the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh,
or buttocks of any person with an intent to arouse or
gratify the sexual desire of any person
. . . . "Contact" means intentional touching, either
directly or through clothing.

According to what the President testified was his
understanding, this definition "covers contact by the
person being deposed with the enumerated areas, if the
contact is done with an intent to arouse or gratify,"
but it does not cover oral sex performed on the person
being deposed. He testified:

[I]f the deponent is the person who has oral sex
performed on him, then the contact is with -- not with
anything on that list, but with the lips of another
person. It seems to be self-evident that that's what it
is. . . . Let me remind you, sir, I read this
carefully.

In the President's view, "any person, reasonable
person" would recognize that oral sex performed on the
deponent falls outside the definition.

If Ms. Lewinsky performed oral sex on the President,
then -- under this interpretation -- she engaged in
sexual relations but he did not. The President refused
to answer whether Ms. Lewinsky in fact had performed
oral sex on him. He did testify that direct contact
with Ms. Lewinsky's breasts or genitalia would fall
within the definition, and he denied having had any
such contact.

2. Ms. Lewinsky's Account

In his grand jury testimony, the President relied
heavily on a particular interpretation of "sexual
relations" as defined in the Jones deposition. Beyond
insisting that his conduct did not fall within the
Jones definition, he refused to answer questions about
the nature of his physical contact with Ms. Lewinsky,
thus placing the grand jury in the position of having
to accept his conclusion without being able to explore
the underlying facts. This strategy -- evidently an
effort to account for possible traces of the
President's semen on Ms. Lewinsky's clothing without
undermining his position that he did not lie in the
Jones deposition -- mandates that this Referral set
forth evidence of an explicit nature that otherwise
would be omitted.

In light of the President's testimony, Ms. Lewinsky's
accounts of their sexual encounters are indispensable
for two reasons. First, the detail and consistency of
these accounts tend to bolster Ms. Lewinsky's
credibility. Second, and particularly important, Ms.
Lewinsky contradicts the President on a key issue.
According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President touched her
breasts and genitalia -- which means that his conduct
met the Jones definition of sexual relations even under
his theory. On these matters, the evidence of the
President's perjury cannot be presented without
specific, explicit, and possibly offensive descriptions
of sexual encounters.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President had
ten sexual encounters, eight while she worked at the
White House and two thereafter. The sexual encounters
generally occurred in or near the private study off the
Oval Office -- most often in the windowless hallway
outside the study. During many of their sexual
encounters, the President stood leaning against the
doorway of the bathroom across from the study, which,
he told Ms. Lewinsky, eased his sore back.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that her physical relationship
with the President included oral sex but not sexual
intercourse. According to Ms. Lewinsky, she performed
oral sex on the President; he never performed oral sex
on her. Initially, according to Ms.  Lewinsky, the
President would not let her perform oral sex to
completion. In Ms. Lewinsky's understanding, his
refusal was related to "trust and not knowing me well
enough." During their last two sexual encounters, both
in 1997, he did ejaculate.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she performed oral sex on
the President on nine occasions. On all nine of those
occasions, the President fondled and kissed her bare
breasts. He touched her genitals, both through her
underwear and directly, bringing her to orgasm on two
occasions. On one occasion, the President inserted a
cigar into her vagina. On another occasion, she and the
President had brief genital-to-genital contact.

Whereas the President testified that "what began as a
friendship came to include [intimate contact]," Ms.
Lewinsky explained that the relationship moved in the
opposite direction: "[T]he emotional and friendship
aspects . . . developed after the beginning of our
sexual relationship."

D. Emotional Attachment

As the relationship developed over time, Ms. Lewinsky
grew emotionally attached to President Clinton. She
testified: "I never expected to fall in love with the
President. I was surprised that I did." Ms. Lewinsky
told him of her feelings. At times, she believed that
he loved her too. They were physically affectionate: "A
lot of hugging, holding hands sometimes. He always used
to push the hair out of my face." She called him
"Handsome"; on occasion, he called her "Sweetie,"
"Baby," or sometimes "Dear."  He told her that he
enjoyed talking to her -- she recalled his saying that
the two of them were "emotive and full of fire," and
she made him feel young. He said he wished he could
spend more time with her.

Ms. Lewinsky told confidants of the emotional
underpinnings of the relationship as it evolved.
According to her mother, Marcia Lewis, the President
once told Ms. Lewinsky that she "had been hurt a lot or
something by different men and that he would be her
friend or he would help her, not hurt her."  According
to Ms. Lewinsky's friend Neysa Erbland, President
Clinton once confided in Ms. Lewinsky that he was
uncertain whether he would remain married after he left
the White House. He said in essence, "[W]ho knows what
will happen four years from now when I am out of
office?" Ms. Lewinsky thought, according to
Ms. Erbland, that "maybe she will be his wife."

E. Conversations and Phone Messages

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she and the President
"enjoyed talking to each other and being with each
other." In her recollection, "We would tell jokes. We
would talk about our childhoods. Talk about current
events. I was always giving him my stupid ideas about
what I thought should be done in the administration or
different views on things." One of Ms. Lewinsky's
friends testified that, in her understanding, "[The
President] would talk about his childhood and growing
up, and [Ms. Lewinsky] would relay stories about her
childhood and growing up. I guess normal conversations
that you would have with someone that you're getting to
know."

The longer conversations often occurred after their
sexual contact. Ms. Lewinsky testified: "[W]hen I was
working there [at the White House] . . . we'd start in
the back [in or near the private study] and we'd talk
and that was where we were physically intimate, and
we'd usually end up, kind of the pillow talk of it, I
guess, . . . sitting in the Oval Office . . . ." During
several meetings when they were not sexually intimate,
they talked in the Oval Office or in the area of the
study.

Along with face-to-face meetings, according to Ms.
Lewinsky, she spoke on the telephone with the President
approximately 50 times, often after 10 p.m. and
sometimes well after midnight. The President placed the
calls himself or, during working hours, had his
secretary, Betty Currie, do so; Ms. Lewinsky could not
telephone him directly, though she sometimes reached
him through Ms. Currie. Ms. Lewinsky testified: "[W]e
spent hours on the phone talking." Their telephone
conversations were "[s]imilar to what we discussed in
person, just how we were doing. A lot of discussions
about my job, when I was trying to come back to the
White House and then once I decided to move to New
York.  . . . We talked about everything under the sun."
On 10 to 15 occasions, she and the President had phone
sex. After phone sex late one night, the President fell
asleep mid-conversation.

On four occasions, the President left very brief
messages on Ms. Lewinsky's answering machine, though he
told her that he did not like doing so because (in her
recollection) he "felt it was a little unsafe." She
saved his messages and played the tapes for several
confidants, who said they believed that the voice was
the President's.

By phone and in person, according to Ms. Lewinsky, she
and the President sometimes had arguments. On a number
of occasions in 1997, she complained that he had not
brought her back from the Pentagon to work in the White
House, as he had promised to do after the election.  In
a face-to-face meeting on July 4, 1997, the President
reprimanded her for a letter she had sent him that
obliquely threatened to disclose their relationship.
During an argument on December 6, 1997, according to
Ms.  Lewinsky, the President said that "he had never
been treated as poorly by anyone else as I treated
him," and added that "he spent more time with me than
anyone else in the world, aside from his family,
friends and staff, which I don't know exactly which
category that put me in."

Testifying before the grand jury, the President
confirmed that he and Ms. Lewinsky had had personal
conversations, and he acknowledged that their telephone
conversations sometimes included "inappropriate sexual
banter." The President said that Ms. Lewinsky told him
about "her personal life," "her upbringing," and "her
job ambitions." After terminating their intimate
relationship in 1997, he said, he tried "to be a friend
to Ms. Lewinsky, to be a counselor to her, to give her
good advice, and to help her."

F. Gifts

Ms. Lewinsky and the President exchanged numerous
gifts.  By her estimate, she gave him about 30 items,
and he gave her about 18. Ms. Lewinsky's first gift to
him was a matted poem given by her and other White
House interns to commemorate "National Boss Day,"
October 24, 1995. This was the only item reflected in
White House records that Ms. Lewinsky gave the
President before (in her account) the sexual
relationship began, and the only item that he sent to
the archives instead of keeping. On November 20 -- five
days after the intimate relationship began, according
to Ms. Lewinsky -- she gave him a necktie, which he
chose to keep rather than send to the
archives. According to Ms.  Lewinsky, the President
telephoned the night she gave him the tie, then sent
her a photo of himself wearing it. The tie was logged
pursuant to White House procedures for gifts to the
President.

In a draft note to the President in December 1997, Ms.
Lewinsky wrote that she was "very particular about
presents and could never give them to anyone else --
they were all bought with you in mind." Many of the 30
or so gifts that she gave the President reflected his
interests in history, antiques, cigars, and frogs. Ms.
Lewinsky gave him, among other things, six neckties, an
antique paperweight showing the White House, a silver
tabletop holder for cigars or cigarettes, a pair of
sunglasses, a casual shirt, a mug emblazoned "Santa
Monica," a frog figurine, a letter opener depicting a
frog, several novels, a humorous book of quotations,
and several antique books. He gave her, among other
things, a hat pin, two brooches, a blanket, a marble
bear figurine, and a special edition of Walt Whitman's
Leaves of Grass.

Ms. Lewinsky construed it as a sign of affection when
the President wore a necktie or other item of clothing
she had given him. She testified: "I used to say to him
that 'I like it when you wear my ties because then I
know I'm close to your heart.' So -- literally and
figuratively." The President was aware of her reaction,
according to Ms. Lewinsky, and he would sometimes wear
one of the items to reassure her -- occasionally on the
day they were scheduled to meet or the day after they
had met in person or talked by telephone. The President
would sometimes say to her, "Did you see I wore your
tie the other day?"

In his grand jury testimony, the President acknowledged
that he had exchanged a number of gifts with Ms.
Lewinsky. After their intimate relationship ended in
1997, he testified, "[S]he continued to give me gifts.
And I felt that it was a right thing to do to give her
gifts back."

G. Messages

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she sent the President a
number of cards and letters. In some, she expressed
anger that he was "not paying enough attention to me";
in others, she said she missed him; in still others,
she just sent "a funny card that I saw." In early
January 1998, she sent him, along with an antique book
about American presidents, "[a]n embarrassing mushy
note." She testified that the President never sent her
any cards or notes other than formal thank-you letters.

Testifying before the grand jury, the President
acknowledged having received cards and notes from Ms.
Lewinsky that were "somewhat intimate" and "quite
affectionate," even after the intimate relationship
ended.

H. Secrecy

1. Mutual Understanding

Both Ms. Lewinsky and the President testified that they
took steps to maintain the secrecy of the relationship.
According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President from the
outset stressed the importance of keeping the
relationship secret. In her handwritten statement to
this Office, Ms.  Lewinsky wrote that "the President
told Ms. L to deny a relationship, if ever asked about
it. He also said something to the effect of if the two
people who are involved say it didn't happen -- it
didn't happen."  According to Ms. Lewinsky, the
President sometimes asked if she had told anyone about
their sexual relationship or about the gifts they had
exchanged; she (falsely) assured him that she had
not. She told him that "I would always deny it, I would
always protect him," and he responded approvingly. The
two of them had, in her words, "a mutual understanding"
that they would "keep this private, so that meant deny
it and . . . take whatever appropriate steps needed to
be taken." When she and the President both were
subpoenaed to testify in the Jones case, Ms. Lewinsky
anticipated that "as we had on every other occasion and
every other instance of this relationship, we would
deny it."

In his grand jury testimony, the President confirmed
his efforts to keep their liaisons secret. He said he
did not want the facts of their relationship to be
disclosed "in any context," and added: "I certainly
didn't want this to come out, if I could help it. And I
was concerned about that. I was embarrassed about it. I
knew it was wrong." Asked if he wanted to avoid having
the facts come out through Ms. Lewinsky's testimony in
Jones, he said: "Well, I did not want her to have to
testify and go through that. And, of course, I didn't
want her to do that, of course not."

2. Cover Stories

For her visits to see the President, according to Ms.
Lewinsky, "[T]here was always some sort of a cover."
When visiting the President while she worked at the
White House, she generally planned to tell anyone who
asked (including Secret Service officers and agents)
that she was delivering papers to the President. Ms.
Lewinsky explained that this artifice may have
originated when "I got there kind of saying, 'Oh, gee,
here are your letters,' wink, wink, wink, and him
saying, 'Okay, that's good.'" To back up her stories,
she generally carried a folder on these visits. (In
truth, according to Ms. Lewinsky, her job never
required her to deliver papers to the President.) On a
few occasions during her White House employment,
Ms. Lewinsky and the President arranged to bump into
each other in the hallway; he then would invite her to
accompany him to the Oval Office. Later, after she left
the White House and started working at the Pentagon,
Ms. Lewinsky relied on Ms. Currie to arrange times when
she could see the President. The cover story for those
visits was that Ms.  Lewinsky was coming to see
Ms. Currie, not the President.

While the President did not expressly instruct her to
lie, according to Ms. Lewinsky, he did suggest
misleading cover stories. And, when she assured him
that she planned to lie about the relationship, he
responded approvingly. On the frequent occasions when
Ms. Lewinsky promised that she would "always deny" the
relationship and "always protect him," for example, the
President responded, in her recollection, "'That's
good,' or -- something affirmative. . . . [N]ot --
'Don't deny it.'"

Once she was named as a possible witness in the Jones
case, according to Ms. Lewinsky, the President reminded
her of the cover stories. After telling her that she
was a potential witness, the President suggested that,
if she were subpoenaed, she could file an affidavit to
avoid being deposed. He also told her she could say
that, when working at the White House, she had
sometimes delivered letters to him, and, after leaving
her White House job, she had sometimes returned to
visit Ms.  Currie. (The President's own testimony in
the Jones case mirrors the recommendations he made to
Ms. Lewinsky for her testimony. In his deposition, the
President testified that he saw Ms. Lewinsky "on two or
three occasions" during the November 1995 government
furlough, "one or two other times when she brought some
documents to me," and "sometime before Christmas" when
Ms.  Lewinsky "came by to see Betty.")

In his grand jury testimony, the President acknowledged
that he and Ms. Lewinsky "might have talked about what
to do in a nonlegal context" to hide their
relationship, and that he "might well have said" that
Ms. Lewinsky should tell people that she was bringing
letters to him or coming to visit Ms. Currie. But he
also stated that "I never asked Ms. Lewinsky to lie."

3. Steps to Avoid Being Seen or Heard

After their first two sexual encounters during the
November 1995 government shutdown, according to Ms.
Lewinsky, her encounters with the President generally
occurred on weekends, when fewer people were in the
West Wing. Ms. Lewinsky testified:

He had told me . . . that he was usually around on the
weekends and that it was okay to come see him on the
weekends. So he would call and we would arrange either
to bump into each other in the hall or that I would
bring papers to the office.

From some of the President's comments, Ms. Lewinsky
gathered that she should try to avoid being seen by
several White House employees, including Nancy
Hernreich, Deputy Assistant to the President and
Director of Oval Office Operations, and Stephen Goodin,
the President's personal aide.

Out of concern about being seen, the sexual encounters
most often occurred in the windowless hallway outside
the study. According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President was
concerned that the two of them might be spotted through
a White House window. When they were in the study
together in the evenings, he sometimes turned out the
light. Once, when she spotted a gardener outside the
study window, they left the room. Ms.  Lewinsky
testified that, on December 28, 1997, "when I was
getting my Christmas kiss" in the doorway to the study,
the President was "looking out the window with his eyes
wide open while he was kissing me and then I got mad
because it wasn't very romantic." He responded, "Well,
I was just looking to see to make sure no one was out
there."

Fear of discovery constrained their sexual encounters
in several respects, according to Ms. Lewinsky. The
President ordinarily kept the door between the private
hallway and the Oval Office several inches ajar during
their encounters, both so that he could hear if anyone
approached and so that anyone who did approach would be
less likely to suspect impropriety. During their sexual
encounters, Ms. Lewinsky testified, "[W]e were both
aware of the volume and sometimes . . . I bit my hand
-- so that I wouldn't make any noise." On one occasion,
according to Ms. Lewinsky, the President put his hand
over her mouth during a sexual encounter to keep her
quiet. Concerned that they might be interrupted
abruptly, according to Ms. Lewinsky, the two of them
never fully undressed.

While noting that "the door to the hallway was always
somewhat open," the President testified that he did try
to keep the intimate relationship secret: "I did what
people do when they do the wrong thing. I tried to do
it where nobody else was looking at it."

4. Ms. Lewinsky's Notes and Letters

The President expressed concern about documents that
might hint at an improper relationship between them,
according to Ms. Lewinsky. He cautioned her about
messages she sent:

There were . . . some occasions when I sent him cards
or notes that I wrote things that he deemed too
personal to put on paper just in case something ever
happened, if it got lost getting there or someone else
opened it. So there were several times when he remarked
to me, you know, you shouldn't put that on paper.

She said that the President made this point to her in
their last conversation, on January 5, 1998, in
reference to what she characterized as "[a]n
embarrassing mushy note" she had sent him. In addition,
according to Ms. Lewinsky, the President expressed
concerns about official records that could establish
aspects of their relationship. She said that on two
occasions she asked the President if she could go
upstairs to the Residence with him. No, he said,
because a record is kept of everyone who accompanies
him there.

The President testified before the grand jury: "I
remember telling her she should be careful what she
wrote, because a lot of it was clearly inappropriate
and would be embarrassing if somebody else read it."

5. Ms. Lewinsky's Evaluation of Their Secrecy Efforts

In two conversations recorded after she was subpoenaed
in the Jones case, Ms. Lewinsky expressed confidence
that her relationship with the President would never be
discovered. She believed that no records showed her and
the President alone in the area of the study.
Regardless of the evidence, in any event, she would
continue denying the relationship. "If someone looked
in the study window, it's not me," she said. If someone
produced tapes of her telephone calls with the
President, she would say they were fakes.

In another recorded conversation, Ms. Lewinsky said she
was especially comforted by the fact that the
President, like her, would be swearing under oath that
"nothing happened." She said:

[T]o tell you the truth, I'm not concerned all that
much anymore because I know I'm not going to get in
trouble.  I will not get in trouble because you know
what? The story I've signed under -- under oath is what
someone else is saying under oath.

          II. 1995: Initial Sexual Encounters

Monica Lewinsky began her White House employment as an
intern in the Chief of Staff's office in July 1995. At
White House functions in the following months, she made
eye contact with the President. During the November
1995 government shutdown, the President invited her to
his private study, where they kissed. Later that
evening, they had a more intimate sexual
encounter. They had another sexual encounter two days
later, and a third one on New Year's Eve.

A. Overview of Monica Lewinsky's White House Employment

Monica Lewinsky worked at the White House, first as an
intern and then as an employee, from July 1995 to April
1996. With the assistance of family friend Walter Kaye,
a prominent contributor to political causes, she
obtained an internship starting in early July, when she
was 21 years old. She was assigned to work on
correspondence in the office of Chief of Staff Leon
Panetta in the Old Executive Office Building.

As her internship was winding down, Ms. Lewinsky
applied for a paying job on the White House staff. She
interviewed with Timothy Keating, Special Assistant to
the President and Staff Director for Legislative
Affairs. Ms. Lewinsky accepted a position dealing with
correspondence in the Office of Legislative Affairs on
November 13, 1995, but did not start the job (and,
thus, continued her internship) until November 26.  She
remained a White House employee until April 1996, when
-- in her view, because of her intimate relationship
with the President -- she was dismissed from the White
House and transferred to the Pentagon.

B. First Meetings with the President

The month after her White House internship began, Ms.
Lewinsky and the President began what she characterized
as "intense flirting." At departure ceremonies and
other events, she made eye contact with him, shook
hands, and introduced herself. When she ran into the
President in the West Wing basement and introduced
herself again, according to Ms. Lewinsky, he responded
that he already knew who she was. Ms. Lewinsky told her
aunt that the President "seemed attracted to her or
interested in her or something," and told a visiting
friend that "she was attracted to [President Clinton],
she had a big crush on him, and I think she told me she
at some point had gotten his attention, that there was
some mutual eye contact and recognition, mutual
acknowledgment."

In the autumn of 1995, an impasse over the budget
forced the federal government to shut down for one
week, from Tuesday, November 14, to Monday, November
20. Only essential federal employees were permitted to
work during the furlough, and the White House staff of
430 shrank to about 90 people for the week. White House
interns could continue working because of their unpaid
status, and they took on a wide range of additional
duties.

During the shutdown, Ms. Lewinsky worked in Chief of
Staff Panetta's West Wing office, where she answered
phones and ran errands. The President came to Mr.
Panetta's office frequently because of the shutdown,
and he sometimes talked with Ms. Lewinsky. She
characterized these encounters as "continued
flirtation." According to Ms. Lewinsky, a Senior
Adviser to the Chief of Staff, Barry Toiv, remarked to
her that she was getting a great deal of "face time"
with the President.

C. November 15 Sexual Encounter

Ms. Lewinsky testified that Wednesday, November 15,
1995 -- the second day of the government shutdown --
marked the beginning of her sexual relationship with
the President. On that date, she entered the White
House at 1:30 p.m., left sometime thereafter (White
House records do not show the time), reentered at 5:07
p.m., and departed at 12:18 a.m. on November 16.  The
President was in the Oval Office or the Chief of
Staff's office (where Ms. Lewinsky worked during the
furlough) for almost the identical period that Ms.
Lewinsky was in the White House that evening, from 5:01
p.m. on November 15 to 12:35 a.m. on November 16.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President made
eye contact when he came to the West Wing to see Mr.
Panetta and Deputy Chief of Staff Harold Ickes, then
again later at an informal birthday party for Jennifer
Palmieri, Special Assistant to the Chief of Staff.  At
one point, Ms. Lewinsky and the President talked alone
in the Chief of Staff's office. In the course of
flirting with him, she raised her jacket in the back
and showed him the straps of her thong underwear, which
extended above her pants.

En route to the restroom at about 8 p.m., she passed
George Stephanopoulos's office. The President was
inside alone, and he beckoned her to enter. She told
him that she had a crush on him. He laughed, then asked
if she would like to see his private office. Through a
connecting door in Mr. Stephanopoulos's office, they
went through the President's private dining room toward
the study off the Oval Office. Ms. Lewinsky testified:
"We talked briefly and sort of acknowledged that there
had been a chemistry that was there before and that we
were both attracted to each other and then he asked me
if he could kiss me." Ms. Lewinsky said yes. In the
windowless hallway adjacent to the study, they
kissed. Before returning to her desk, Ms. Lewinsky
wrote down her name and telephone number for the
President.

At about 10 p.m., in Ms. Lewinsky's recollection, she
was alone in the Chief of Staff's office and the
President approached. He invited her to rendezvous
again in Mr. Stephanopoulos's office in a few minutes,
and she agreed. (Asked if she knew why the President
wanted to meet with her, Ms. Lewinsky testified: "I had
an idea.") They met in Mr.  Stephanopoulos's office and
went again to the area of the private study. This time
the lights in the study were off.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President
kissed.  She unbuttoned her jacket; either she unhooked
her bra or he lifted her bra up; and he touched her
breasts with his hands and mouth. Ms. Lewinsky
testified: "I believe he took a phone call . . . and so
we moved from the hallway into the back office
. . . . [H]e put his hand down my pants and stimulated
me manually in the genital area." While the President
continued talking on the phone (Ms. Lewinsky understood
that the caller was a Member of Congress or a Senator),
she performed oral sex on him. He finished his call,
and, a moment later, told Ms. Lewinsky to stop. In her
recollection: "I told him that I wanted . . . to
complete that. And he said . . . that he needed to wait
until he trusted me more. And then I think he made a
joke . . . that he hadn't had that in a long time."

Both before and after their sexual contact during that
encounter, Ms. Lewinsky and the President talked.  At
one point during the conversation, the President tugged
on the pink intern pass hanging from her neck and said
that it might be a problem. Ms. Lewinsky thought that
he was talking about access -- interns were not
supposed to be in the West Wing without an escort --
and, in addition, that he might have discerned some
"impropriety" in a sexual relationship with a White
House intern.

White House records corroborate details of Ms.
Lewinsky's account. She testified that her November 15
encounters with the President occurred at about 8 p.m.
and 10 p.m., and that in each case the two of them went
from the Chief of Staff's office to the Oval Office
area. Records show that the President visited the Chief
of Staff's office for one minute at 8:12 p.m. and for
two minutes at 9:23 p.m., in each case returning to the
Oval Office. She recalled that the President took a
telephone call during their sexual encounter, and she
believed that the caller was a Member of Congress or a
Senator. White House records show that after returning
to the Oval Office from the Chief of Staff's office,
the President talked to two Members of Congress:
Rep. Jim Chapman from 9:25 p.m. to 9:30 p.m., and Rep.
John Tanner from 9:31 p.m. to 9:35 p.m.

D. November 17 Sexual Encounter

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President had a
second sexual encounter two days later (still during
the government furlough), on Friday, November 17. She
was at the White House until 8:56 p.m., then returned
from 9:38 to 10:39 p.m. At 9:45 p.m., a few minutes
after Ms.  Lewinsky's reentry, the President went from
the Oval Office to the Chief of Staff's office (where
Ms.  Lewinsky worked during the furlough) for one
minute, then returned to the Oval Office for 30
minutes. From there, he went back to the Chief of
Staff's office until 10:34 p.m. (approximately when
Ms. Lewinsky left the White House), then went by the
Oval Office and the Ground Floor before retiring to the
Residence at 10:40 p.m.

Ms. Lewinsky testified:

We were again working late because it was during the
furlough and Jennifer Palmieri . . . had ordered pizza
along with Ms. Currie and Ms. Hernreich. And when the
pizza came, I went down to let them know that the pizza
was there and it was at that point when I walked into
Ms. Currie's office that the President was standing
there with some other people discussing something.

And they all came back to the office and Mr. -- I think
it was Mr. Toiv, somebody accidentally knocked pizza on
my jacket, so I went to go use the restroom to wash it
off and as I was coming out of the restroom, the
President was standing in Ms. Currie's doorway and
said, "You can come out this way."

Ms. Lewinsky and the President went into the area of
the private study, according to Ms. Lewinsky. There,
either in the hallway or the bathroom, she and the
President kissed. After a few minutes, in
Ms. Lewinsky's recollection, she told him that she
needed to get back to her desk. The President suggested
that she bring him some slices of pizza.

A few minutes later, she returned to the Oval Office
area with pizza and told Ms. Currie that the President
had requested it. Ms. Lewinsky testified: "[Ms. Currie]
opened the door and said, 'Sir, the girl's here with
the pizza.' He told me to come in. Ms. Currie went back
into her office and then we went into the back study
area again." Several witnesses confirm that when Ms.
Lewinsky delivered pizza to the President that night,
the two of them were briefly alone.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she and the President had a
sexual encounter during this visit. They kissed, and
the President touched Ms. Lewinsky's bare breasts with
his hands and mouth. At some point, Ms. Currie
approached the door leading to the hallway, which was
ajar, and said that the President had a telephone
call. Ms. Lewinsky recalled that the caller was a
Member of Congress with a nickname. While the President
was on the telephone, according to Ms.  Lewinsky, "he
unzipped his pants and exposed himself," and she
performed oral sex. Again, he stopped her before he
ejaculated.

During this visit, according to Ms. Lewinsky, the
President told her that he liked her smile and her
energy. He also said: "I'm usually around on weekends,
no one else is around, and you can come and see me."

Records corroborate Ms. Lewinsky's recollection that
the President took a call from a Member of Congress
with a nickname. While Ms. Lewinsky was at the White
House that evening (9:38 to 10:39 p.m.), the President
had one telephone conversation with a Member of
Congress: From 9:53 to 10:14 p.m., he spoke with
Rep. H.L. "Sonny" Callahan.

In his Jones deposition on January 17, 1998, President
Clinton -- who said he was unable to recall most of his
encounters with Ms. Lewinsky -- did remember her "back
there with a pizza" during the government shutdown. He
said, however, that he did not believe that the two of
them were alone. Testifying before the grand jury on
August 17, 1998, the President said that his first
"real conversation" with Ms. Lewinsky occurred during
the November 1995 furlough. He testified: "One night
she brought me some pizza. We had some remarks."

E. December 31 Sexual Encounter

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President had
their third sexual encounter on New Year's Eve. Ms.
Lewinsky -- by then a member of the staff of the Office
of Legislative Affairs

-- was at the White House on Sunday, December 31, 1995,
until 1:16 p.m.; her time of arrival is not shown.  The
President was in the Oval Office area from 12:11
p.m. until about the time that Ms. Lewinsky left, 1:15
p.m., when he went to the Residence.

Sometime between noon and 1 p.m., in Ms. Lewinsky's
recollection, she was in the pantry area of the
President's private dining room talking with a White
House steward, Bayani Nelvis. She told Mr. Nelvis that
she had recently smoked her first cigar, and he offered
to give her one of the President's cigars. Just then,
the President came down the hallway from the Oval
Office and saw Ms. Lewinsky. The President dispatched
Mr.  Nelvis to deliver something to Mr. Panetta.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she told the President that
Mr. Nelvis had promised her a cigar, and the President
gave her one. She told him her name -- she had the
impression that he had forgotten it in the six weeks
since their furlough encounters because, when passing
her in the hallway, he had called her "Kiddo." The
President replied that he knew her name; in fact, he
added, having lost the phone number she had given him,
he had tried to find her in the phonebook.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, they moved to the
study. "And then . . . we were kissing and he lifted my
sweater and exposed my breasts and was fondling them
with his hands and with his mouth." She performed oral
sex.  Once again, he stopped her before he ejaculated
because, Ms. Lewinsky testified, "he didn't know me
well enough or he didn't trust me yet."

According to Ms. Lewinsky, a Secret Service officer
named Sandy was on duty in the West Wing that day.
Records show that Sandra Verna was on duty outside the
Oval Office from 7 a.m. to 2 p.m.

F. President's Account of 1995 Relationship

As noted, the President testified before the grand jury
that on November 17, 1995, Ms. Lewinsky delivered pizza
and exchanged "some remarks" with him, but he never
indicated that anything sexual occurred then or at any
other point in 1995. Testifying under oath before the
grand jury, the President said that he engaged in
"conduct that was wrong" involving "inappropriate
intimate contact" with Ms. Lewinsky "on certain
occasions in early 1996 and once in early 1997." By
implicitly denying any sexual contact in 1995, the
President indicated that he and Ms. Lewinsky had no
sexual involvement while she was an intern. In the
President's testimony, his relationship with Ms.
Lewinsky "began as a friendship," then later "came to
include this conduct."

 III. January-March 1996: Continued Sexual Encounters

President Clinton and Ms. Lewinsky had additional
sexual encounters near the Oval Office in 1996. After
their sixth sexual encounter, the President and
Ms. Lewinsky had their first lengthy conversation. On
President's Day, February 19, the President terminated
their sexual relationship, then revived it on March 31.

A. January 7 Sexual Encounter

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President had
another sexual encounter on Sunday, January 7, 1996.
Although White House records do not indicate that Ms.
Lewinsky was at the White House that day, her testimony
and other evidence indicate that she was there. The
President, according to White House records, was in the
Oval Office most of the afternoon, from 2:13 to 5:49
p.m.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President telephoned her
early that afternoon. It was the first time he had
called her at home. In her recollection: "I asked him
what he was doing and he said he was going to be going
into the office soon. I said, oh, do you want some
company? And he said, oh, that would be great." Ms.
Lewinsky went to her office, and the President called
to arrange their rendezvous:

[W]e made an arrangement that . . . he would have the
door to his office open, and I would pass by the office
with some papers and then . . . he would sort of stop
me and invite me in. So, that was exactly what
happened. I passed by and that was actually when I saw
[Secret Service Uniformed Officer] Lew Fox who was on
duty outside the Oval Office, and stopped and spoke
with Lew for a few minutes, and then the President came
out and said, oh, hey, Monica . . . come on in
. . . . And so we spoke for about 10 minutes in the
[Oval] office. We sat on the sofas. Then we went into
the back study and we were intimate in the bathroom.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that during this bathroom
encounter, she and the President kissed, and he touched
her bare breasts with his hands and his mouth. The
President "was talking about performing oral sex on
me," according to Ms. Lewinsky. But she stopped him
because she was menstruating and he did not. Ms.
Lewinsky did perform oral sex on him.

Afterward, she and the President moved to the Oval
Office and talked. According to Ms. Lewinsky: "[H]e was
chewing on a cigar. And then he had the cigar in his
hand and he was kind of looking at the cigar in . . .
sort of a naughty way. And so . . . I looked at the
cigar and I looked at him and I said, we can do that,
too, some time."

Corroborating aspects of Ms. Lewinsky's recollection,
records show that Officer Fox was posted outside the
Oval Office the afternoon of January 7. Officer Fox
(who is now retired) testified that he recalled an
incident with Ms. Lewinsky one weekend afternoon when
he was on duty by the Oval Office:

[T]he President of the United States came out, and he
asked me, he says, "Have you seen any young
congressional staff members here today?" I said, "No,
sir." He said, "Well, I'm expecting one." He says,
"Would you please let me know when they show up?" And I
said, "Yes, sir."

Officer Fox construed the reference to "congressional
staff members" to mean White House staff who worked
with Congress -- i.e., staff of the Legislative Affairs
Office, where Ms. Lewinsky worked.

Talking with a Secret Service agent posted in the
hallway, Officer Fox speculated on whom the President
was expecting: "I described Ms. Lewinsky, without
mentioning the name, in detail, dark hair -- you know,
I gave a general description of what she looked like."
Officer Fox had gotten to know Ms. Lewinsky during her
tenure at the White House, and other agents had told
him that she often spent time with the President.

A short time later, Ms. Lewinsky approached, greeted
Officer Fox, and said, "I have some papers for the
President." Officer Fox admitted her to the Oval
Office.  The President said: "You can close the
door. She'll be here for a while."

B. January 21 Sexual Encounter

On Sunday, January 21, 1996, according to Ms. Lewinsky,
she and the President had another sexual encounter. Her
time of White House entry is not reflected in records.
She left at 3:56 p.m. The President moved from the
Residence to the Oval Office at 3:33 p.m. and remained
there until 7:40 p.m.

On that day, according to Ms. Lewinsky, she saw the
President in a hallway by an elevator, and he invited
her to the Oval Office. According to Ms. Lewinsky:

We had . . . had phone sex for the first time the week
prior, and I was feeling a little bit insecure about
whether he had liked it or didn't like it . . . . I
didn't know if this was sort of developing into some
kind of a longer-term relationship than what I thought
it initially might have been, that maybe he had some
regular girlfriend who was furloughed . . . .

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she questioned the President
about his interest in her. "I asked him why he doesn't
ask me any questions about myself, and . . . is this
just about sex . . . or do you have some interest in
trying to get to know me as a person?" The President
laughed and said, according to Ms. Lewinsky, that "he
cherishes the time that he had with me."  She
considered it "a little bit odd" for him to speak of
cherishing their time together "when I felt like he
didn't really even know me yet."

They continued talking as they went to the hallway by
the study. Then, with Ms. Lewinsky in mid-sentence, "he
just started kissing me." He lifted her top and touched
her breasts with his hands and mouth.  According to
Ms. Lewinsky, the President "unzipped his pants and
sort of exposed himself," and she performed oral sex.

At one point during the encounter, someone entered the
Oval Office. In Ms. Lewinsky's recollection, "[The
President] zipped up real quickly and went out and came
back in . . . . I just remember laughing because he had
walked out there and he was visibly aroused, and I just
thought it was funny."

A short time later, the President got word that his
next appointment, a friend from Arkansas, had arrived.
He took Ms. Lewinsky out through the Oval Office into
Ms. Hernreich's office, where he kissed her goodbye.

C. February 4 Sexual Encounter and Subsequent Phone
Calls

On Sunday, February 4, according to Ms. Lewinsky, she
and the President had their sixth sexual encounter and
their first lengthy and personal conversation. The
President was in the Oval Office from 3:36 to 7:05
p.m. He had no telephone calls in the Oval Office
before 4:45 p.m. Records do not show Ms. Lewinsky's
entry or exit.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President telephoned her
at her desk and they planned their rendezvous. At her
suggestion, they bumped into each other in the hallway,
"because when it happened accidentally, that seemed to
work really well," then walked together to the area of
the private study.

There, according to Ms. Lewinsky, they kissed. She was
wearing a long dress that buttoned from the neck to the
ankles. "And he unbuttoned my dress and he unhooked my
bra, and sort of took the dress off my shoulders and
. .  . moved the bra . . . . [H]e was looking at me and
touching me and telling me how beautiful I was." He
touched her breasts with his hands and his mouth, and
touched her genitals, first through underwear and then
directly. She performed oral sex on him.

After their sexual encounter, the President and Ms.
Lewinsky sat and talked in the Oval Office for about 45
minutes. Ms. Lewinsky thought the President might be
responding to her suggestion during their previous
meeting about "trying to get to know me." It was during
that conversation on February 4, according to Ms.
Lewinsky, that their friendship started to blossom.

When she prepared to depart, according to Ms. Lewinsky,
the President "kissed my arm and told me he'd call me,
and then I said, yeah, well, what's my phone number?
And so he recited both my home number and my office
number off the top of his head." The President called
her at her desk later that afternoon and said he had
enjoyed their time together.

D. President's Day (February 19) Break-up

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President terminated
their relationship (only temporarily, as it happened),
on Monday, February 19, 1996 -- President's Day. The
President was in the Oval Office from 11 a.m. to 2:01
p.m. that day. He had no telephone calls between 12:19
and 12:42 p.m. Records do not reflect Ms.  Lewinsky's
presence at the White House.

In Ms. Lewinsky's recollection, the President
telephoned her at her Watergate apartment that
day. From the tone of his voice, she could tell
something was wrong. She asked to come see him, but he
said he did not know how long he would be
there. Ms. Lewinsky went to the White House, then
walked to the Oval Office sometime between noon and 2
p.m. (the only time she ever went to the Oval Office
uninvited). Ms. Lewinsky recalled that she was admitted
by a tall, slender, Hispanic plainclothes agent on duty
near the door.

The President told her that he no longer felt right
about their intimate relationship, and he had to put a
stop to it. Ms. Lewinsky was welcome to continue coming
to visit him, but only as a friend. He hugged her but
would not kiss her. At one point during their
conversation, the President had a call from a sugar
grower in Florida whose name, according to
Ms. Lewinsky, was something like "Fanuli." In
Ms. Lewinsky's recollection, the President may have
taken or returned the call just as she was leaving.

Ms. Lewinsky's account is corroborated in two respects.
First, Nelson U. Garabito, a plainclothes Secret
Service agent, testified that, on a weekend or holiday
while Ms.  Lewinsky worked at the White House (most
likely in the early spring of 1996), Ms. Lewinsky
appeared in the area of the Oval Office carrying a
folder and said, "I have these papers for the
President." After knocking, Agent Garabito opened the
Oval Office door, told the President he had a visitor,
ushered Ms. Lewinsky in, and closed the door behind
her. When Agent Garabito's shift ended a few minutes
later, Ms. Lewinsky was still in the Oval Office.

Second, concerning Ms. Lewinsky's recollection of a
call from a sugar grower named "Fanuli," the President
talked with Alfonso Fanjul of Palm Beach, Florida, from
12:42 to 1:04 p.m. Mr. Fanjul had telephoned a few
minutes earlier, at 12:24 p.m. The Fanjuls are
prominent sugar growers in Florida.

E. Continuing Contacts

After the break-up on February 19, 1996, according to
Ms. Lewinsky, "there continued to sort of be this
flirtation . . . when we'd see each other." After
passing Ms. Lewinsky in a hallway one night in late
February or March, the President telephoned her at home
and said he was disappointed that, because she had
already left the White House for the evening, they
could not get together. Ms. Lewinsky testified that the
call "sort of implied to me that he was interested in
starting up again." On March 10, 1996, Ms. Lewinsky
took a visiting friend, Natalie Ungvari, to the White
House. They bumped into the President, who said to Ms.
Ungvari when Ms. Lewinsky introduced them: "You must be
her friend from California." Ms. Ungvari was "shocked"
that the President knew where she was from.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that on Friday, March 29, 1996,
she was walking down a hallway when she passed the
President, who was wearing the first necktie she had
given him. She asked where he had gotten the tie, and
he replied: "Some girl with style gave it to me."
Later, he telephoned her at her desk and asked if she
would like to see a movie. His plan was that she would
position herself in the hallway by the White House
Theater at a certain time, and he would invite her to
join him and a group of guests as they entered. Ms.
Lewinsky responded that she did not want people to
think she was lurking around the West Wing
uninvited. She asked if they could arrange a rendezvous
over the weekend instead, and he said he would
try. Records confirm that the President spent the
evening of March 29 in the White House
Theater. Mrs. Clinton was in Athens, Greece.

F. March 31 Sexual Encounter

On Sunday, March 31, 1996, according to Ms. Lewinsky,
she and the President resumed their sexual contact.
Ms. Lewinsky was at the White House from 10:21 a.m. to
4:27 p.m. on that day. The President was in the Oval
Office from 3:00 to 5:46 p.m. His only call while in
the Oval Office was from 3:06 to 3:07 p.m.
Mrs. Clinton was in Ireland.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President telephoned her
at her desk and suggested that she come to the Oval
Office on the pretext of delivering papers to him.  She
went to the Oval Office and was admitted by a
plainclothes Secret Service agent. In her folder was a
gift for the President, a Hugo Boss necktie.

In the hallway by the study, the President and Ms.
Lewinsky kissed. On this occasion, according to Ms.
Lewinsky, "he focused on me pretty exclusively,"
kissing her bare breasts and fondling her genitals. At
one point, the President inserted a cigar into Ms.
Lewinsky's vagina, then put the cigar in his mouth and
said: "It tastes good." After they were finished,
Ms. Lewinsky left the Oval Office and walked through
the Rose Garden.

IV. April 1996: Ms. Lewinsky's Transfer to the Pentagon

With White House and Secret Service employees remarking
on Ms. Lewinsky's frequent presence in the West Wing, a
deputy chief of staff ordered Ms. Lewinsky transferred
from the White House to the Pentagon. On April 7 --
Easter Sunday -- Ms. Lewinsky told the President of her
dismissal. He promised to bring her back after the
election, and they had a sexual encounter.

A. Earlier Observations of Ms. Lewinsky in the West
Wing

Ms. Lewinsky's visits to the Oval Office area had not
gone unnoticed. Officer Fox testified that "it was
pretty commonly known that she did frequent the West
Wing on the weekends." Another Secret Service uniformed
officer, William Ludtke III, once saw her exit from the
pantry near the Oval Office; she seemed startled and
possibly embarrassed to be spotted.  Officer John
Muskett testified that "if the President was known to
be coming into the Diplomatic Reception Room, a lot of
times [Ms. Lewinsky] just happened to be walking down
the corridor, you know, maybe just to see the
President." Ms. Lewinsky acknowledged that she tried to
position herself to see the President.

Although they could not date them precisely, Secret
Service officers and agents testified about several
occasions when Ms. Lewinsky and the President were
alone in the Oval Office. William C. Bordley, a former
member of the Presidential Protective Detail, testified
that in late 1995 or early 1996, he stopped
Ms. Lewinsky outside the Oval Office because she did
not have her pass.  The President opened the Oval
Office door, indicated to Agent Bordley that
Ms. Lewinsky's presence was all right, and ushered
Ms. Lewinsky into the Oval Office. Agent Bordley saw
Ms. Lewinsky leave about half an hour later.

Another former member of the Presidential Protective
Detail, Robert C. Ferguson, testified that one Saturday
in winter, the President told him that he was expecting
"some staffers." A short time later, Ms. Lewinsky
arrived and said that "[t]he President needs me."
Agent Ferguson announced Ms. Lewinsky and admitted her
to the Oval Office. About 10 or 15 minutes later, Agent
Ferguson rotated to a post on the Colonnade outside the
Oval Office. He glanced through the window into the
Oval Office and saw the President and Ms. Lewinsky go
through the door leading toward the private study.

Deeming her frequent visits to the Oval Office area a
"nuisance," one Secret Service Officer complained to
Evelyn Lieberman, the Deputy Chief of Staff for
Operations. Ms. Lieberman was already aware of Ms.
Lewinsky. In December 1995, according to Ms. Lewinsky,
Ms. Lieberman chided her for being in the West Wing and
told her that interns are not permitted around the Oval
Office. Ms. Lewinsky (who had begun her Office of
Legislative Affairs job) told Ms. Lieberman that she
was not an intern anymore. After expressing surprise
that Ms. Lewinsky had been hired, Ms. Lieberman said
she must have Ms. Lewinsky confused with someone
else. Ms.  Lieberman confirmed that she reprimanded
Ms. Lewinsky, whom she considered "what we used to call
a 'clutch' . . . always someplace she shouldn't be."

In Ms. Lewinsky's view, some White House staff members
seemed to think that she was to blame for the
President's evident interest in her:

[P]eople were wary of his weaknesses, maybe, and . . .
they didn't want to look at him and think that he could
be responsible for anything, so it had to all be my
fault . . . I was stalking him or I was making advances
towards him.

B. Decision to Transfer Ms. Lewinsky

Ms. Lieberman testified that, because Ms. Lewinsky was
so persistent in her efforts to be near the President,
"I decided to get rid of her." First she consulted
Chief of Staff Panetta. According to Mr. Panetta, Ms.
Lieberman told him about a woman on the staff who was
"spending too much time around the West Wing." Because
of "the appearance that it was creating," Ms. Lieberman
proposed to move her out of the White
House. Mr. Panetta -- who testified that he valued
Ms. Lieberman's role as "a tough disciplinarian" and
"trusted her judgment" -- replied, "Fine." Although
Ms. Lieberman said she could not recall having heard
any rumors linking the President and Ms. Lewinsky, she
acknowledged that "the President was vulnerable to
these kind of rumors . . .  yes, yes, that was one of
the reasons" for moving Ms.  Lewinsky out of the White
House. Later, in September 1997, Marcia Lewis
(Ms. Lewinsky's mother) complained about her daughter's
dismissal to Ms.  Lieberman, whom she met at a Voice of
America ceremony.  Ms. Lieberman, according to
Ms. Lewis, responded by "saying something about Monica
being cursed because she's beautiful." Ms. Lewis
gathered from the remark that Ms. Lieberman, as part of
her effort to protect the President, "would want to
have pretty women moved out."

Most people understood that the principal reason for
Ms.  Lewinsky's transfer was her habit of hanging
around the Oval Office and the West Wing. In a memo in
October 1996, John Hilley, Assistant to the President
and Director of Legislative Affairs, reported that Ms.
Lewinsky had been "got[ten] rid of" in part "because of
'extracurricular activities'" (a phrase, he maintained
in the grand jury, that meant only that Ms. Lewinsky
was often absent from her work station).

White House officials arranged for Ms. Lewinsky to get
another job in the Administration. "Our direction is to
make sure she has a job in an Agency," Patsy Thomasson
wrote in an email message on April 9,
1996. Ms. Thomasson's office (Presidential Personnel)
sent Ms. Lewinsky's resume to Charles Duncan, Special
Assistant to the Secretary of Defense and White House
Liaison, and asked him to find a Pentagon opening for
her. Mr. Duncan was told that, though Ms.  Lewinsky had
performed her duties capably, she was being dismissed
for hanging around the Oval Office too much. According
to Mr. Duncan -- who had received as many as 40 job
referrals per day from the White House -- the White
House had never given such an explanation for a
transfer.

C. Ms. Lewinsky's Notification of Her Transfer

On Friday, April 5, 1996, Timothy Keating, Staff
Director for Legislative Affairs, informed Ms. Lewinsky
that she would have to leave her White House job.
According to Mr. Keating, he told her that she was not
being fired, merely "being given a different
opportunity." In fact, she could tell people it was a
promotion if she cared to do so. Upon hearing of her
dismissal, Ms. Lewinsky burst into tears and asked if
there was any way for her to stay in the White House,
even without pay. No, Mr. Keating said. According to
Ms. Lewinsky, "He told me I was too sexy to be working
in the East Wing and that this job at the Pentagon
where I'd be writing press releases was a sexier job."

Ms. Lewinsky was devastated. She felt that she was
being transferred simply because of her relationship
with the President. And she feared that with the loss
of her White House job, "I was never going to see the
President again. I mean, my relationship with him would
be over."

D. Conversations with the President about Her Transfer

1. Easter Telephone Conversations and Sexual Encounter

On Easter Sunday, April 7, 1996, Ms. Lewinsky told the
President of her dismissal and they had a sexual
encounter. Ms. Lewinsky entered the White House at 4:56
and left at 5:28 p.m. The President was in the Oval
Office all afternoon, from 2:21 to 7:48 p.m.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President telephoned her
at home that day. After they spoke of the death of the
Commerce Secretary the previous week, she told him of
her dismissal:

I had asked him . . . if he was doing okay with Ron
Brown's death, and then after we talked about that for
a little bit I told him that my last day was
Monday. And .  . . he seemed really upset and sort of
asked me to tell him what had happened. So I did and I
was crying and I asked him if I could come see him, and
he said that that was fine.

At the White House, according to Ms. Lewinsky, she told
Secret Service Officer Muskett that she needed to
deliver papers to the President. Officer Muskett
admitted her to the Oval Office, and she and the
President proceeded to the private study.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President seemed
troubled about her upcoming departure from the White
House:

He told me that he thought that my being transferred
had something to do with him and that he was upset. He
said, "Why do they have to take you away from me? I
trust you." And then he told me -- he looked at me and
he said, "I promise you if I win in November I'll bring
you back like that."

He also indicated that she could have any job she
wanted after the election. In addition, the President
said he would find out why Ms. Lewinsky was transferred
and report back to her.

When asked if he had promised to get Ms. Lewinsky
another White House job, the President told the grand
jury:

What I told Ms. Lewinsky was that . . . I would do what
I could to see, if she had a good record at the
Pentagon, and she assured me she was doing a good job
and working hard, that I would do my best to see that
the fact that she had been sent away from the
Legislative Affairs section did not keep her from
getting a job in the White House, and that is, in fact,
what I tried to do. . . . But I did not tell her I
would order someone to hire her, and I never did, and I
wouldn't do that. It wouldn't be right.

Ms. Lewinsky, when asked if the President had said that
he would bring her back to the White House only if she
did a good job at the Pentagon, responded: "No."

After this Easter Sunday conversation, the President
and Ms. Lewinsky had a sexual encounter in the hallway,
according to Ms. Lewinsky. She testified that the
President touched her breasts with his mouth and
hands. According to Ms. Lewinsky: "I think he unzipped
[his pants] . . . because it was sort of this running
joke that I could never unbutton his pants, that I just
had trouble with it." Ms. Lewinsky performed oral
sex. The President did not ejaculate in her presence.

During this encounter, someone called out from the Oval
Office that the President had a phone call. He went
back to the Oval Office for a moment, then took the
call in the study. The President indicated that
Ms. Lewinsky should perform oral sex while he talked on
the phone, and she obliged. The telephone conversation
was about politics, and Ms. Lewinsky thought the caller
might be Dick Morris. White House records confirm that
the President had one telephone call during Ms.
Lewinsky's visit: from "Mr. Richard Morris," to whom he
talked from 5:11 to 5:20 p.m.

A second interruption occurred a few minutes later,
according to Ms. Lewinsky. She and the President were
in the study. Ms. Lewinsky testified:

Harold Ickes has a very distinct voice and . . . I
heard him holler "Mr. President," and the President
looked at me and I looked at him and he jetted out into
the Oval Office and I panicked and . . . thought that
maybe because Harold was so close with the President
that they might just wander back there and the
President would assume that I knew to leave.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she exited hurriedly
through the dining room door. That evening, the
President called and asked Ms. Lewinsky why she had run
off. "I told him that I didn't know if he was going to
be coming back . . . . [H]e was a little upset with me
that I left."

In addition to the record of the Dick Morris phone
call, the testimony of Secret Service Officer Muskett
corroborates Ms. Lewinsky's account. Officer Muskett
was posted near the door to the Oval Office on Easter
Sunday. He testified that Ms. Lewinsky (whom he knew)
arrived at about 4:45 p.m. carrying a manila folder and
seeming "a little upset." She told Officer Muskett that
she needed to deliver documents to the
President. Officer Muskett or the plainclothes agent on
duty with him opened the door, and Ms. Lewinsky
entered.

About 20 to 25 minutes later, according to Officer
Muskett, the telephone outside the Oval Office
rang. The White House operator said that the President
had an important call but he was not picking up. The
agent working alongside Officer Muskett knocked on the
door to the Oval Office. When the President did not
respond, the agent entered. The Oval Office was empty,
and the door leading to the study was slightly
ajar. (Ms.  Lewinsky testified that the President left
the door ajar during their sexual encounters.) The
agent called out, "Mr. President?" There was no
response. The agent stepped into the Oval Office and
called out more loudly, "Mr. President?" This time
there was a response from the study area, according to
Officer Muskett: "Huh?" The agent called out that the
President had a phone call, and the President said he
would take it.

A few minutes later, according to Officer Muskett, Mr.
Ickes approached and said he needed to see President
Clinton. Officer Muskett admitted him through Ms.
Currie's office. Less than a minute after Mr. Ickes
entered Ms. Currie's reception area, according to
Officer Muskett, the pantry or dining room door closed
audibly. Officer Muskett stepped down the hall to check
and saw Ms. Lewinsky walking away briskly.

At 5:30 p.m., two minutes after Ms. Lewinsky left the
White House, the President called the office of the
person who had decided to transfer Ms. Lewinsky, Evelyn
Lieberman.

2. April 12-13: Telephone Conversations

Ms. Lewinsky testified that the President telephoned
her the following Friday, April 12, 1996, at home. They
talked for about 20 minutes. According to Ms. Lewinsky,
the President said he had checked on the reason for her
transfer:

[H]e had come to learn . . . that Evelyn Lieberman had
sort of spearheaded the transfer, and that she thought
he was paying too much attention to me and I was paying
too much attention to him and that she didn't
necessarily care what happened after the election but
everyone needed to be careful before the election.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President told her to
give the Pentagon a try, and, if she did not like it,
he would get her a job on the campaign.

In the grand jury, Ms. Lieberman testified that the
President asked her directly about Ms. Lewinsky's
transfer:

After I had gotten rid of her, when I was in there,
during the course of a conversation, [President
Clinton] said, "I got a call about --" I don't know if
he said her name. He said maybe "-- an intern you
fired." And she was evidently very upset about it. He
said, "Do you know anything about this?" I said, "Yes."
He said, "Who fired her?" I said, "I did." And he said,
"Oh, okay."

According to Ms. Lieberman, the President did not
pursue the matter further.

Three other witnesses confirm that the President knew
why Ms. Lewinsky was transferred to the Pentagon. In
1997, the President told Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles
"that there was a young woman -- her name was Monica
Lewinsky -- who used to work at the White House; that
Evelyn . . . thought she hung around the Oval Office
too much and transferred her to the Pentagon."
According to Betty Currie, the President believed that
Ms. Lewinsky had been unfairly transferred. The
President's close friend, Vernon Jordan, testified that
the President said to him in December 1997 that "he
knew about [Ms. Lewinsky's] situation, which was that
she was pushed out of the White House."

      V. April-December 1996: No Private Meetings

After Ms. Lewinsky began her Pentagon job on April 16,
1996, she had no further physical contact with the
President for the remainder of the year. She and the
President spoke by phone (and had phone sex) but saw
each other only at public functions. Ms. Lewinsky grew
frustrated after the election because the President did
not bring her back to work at the White House.

A. Pentagon Job

On April 16, 1996, Ms. Lewinsky began working at the
Pentagon as Confidential Assistant to the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs.

B. No Physical Contact

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she had no physical contact
with the President for the rest of 1996. "I wasn't
alone with him so when I saw him it was in some sort of
event or group setting," she testified.

C. Telephone Conversations

Ms. Lewinsky and the President did talk by telephone,
especially in her first weeks at the new job. By
Ms. Lewinsky's estimate, the President phoned her
(sometimes leaving a message) four or five times in the
month after she started working at the Pentagon, then
two or three times a month thereafter for the rest of
1996. During the fall 1996 campaign, the President
sometimes called from trips when Mrs. Clinton was not
accompanying him. During at least seven of the 1996
calls, Ms. Lewinsky and the President had phone sex.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President telephoned her
at about 6:30 a.m. on July 19, the day he was leaving
for the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, and they had phone
sex, after which the President exclaimed, "[G]ood
morning!" and then said: "What a way to start a day." A
call log shows that the President called the White
House operator at 12:11 a.m. on July 19 and asked for a
wake-up call at 7 a.m., then at 6:40 a.m., the
President called and said he was already up. In
Ms. Lewinsky's recollection, she and the President also
had phone sex on May 21, July 5 or 6, October 22, and
December 2, 1996. On those dates, Mrs. Clinton was in
Denver (May 21), Prague and Budapest (July 5-6), Las
Vegas (October 22), and en route to Bolivia (December
2).

Ms. Lewinsky repeatedly told the President that she
disliked her Pentagon job and wanted to return to the
White House. In a recorded conversation, Ms.  Lewinsky
recounted one call:

[A] month had passed and -- so he had called one night,
and I said, "Well," I said, "I'm really unhappy," you
know. And [the President] said, "I don't want to talk
about your job tonight. I'll call you this week, and
then we'll talk about it. I want to talk about other
things" -- which meant phone sex.

She expected to talk with him the following weekend,
and she was "ready to broach the idea of . . . going to
the campaign," but he did not call.

Ms. Lewinsky and the President also talked about their
relationship. During a phone conversation on September
5, according to Ms. Lewinsky, she told the President
that she wanted to have intercourse with him. He
responded that he could not do so because of the
possible consequences. The two of them argued, and he
asked if he should stop calling her. No, she responded.

D. Public Encounters

During this period, Ms. Lewinsky occasionally saw the
President in public. She testified:

I'm an insecure person . . . and I was insecure about
the relationship at times and thought that he would
come to forget me easily and if I hadn't heard from him
. . .  it was very difficult for me . . . . [U]sually
when I'd see him, it would kind of prompt him to call
me. So I made an effort. I would go early and stand in
the front so I could see him . . . .

On May 2, 1996, Ms. Lewinsky saw the President at a
reception for the Saxophone Club, a political
organization. On June 14, Ms. Lewinsky and her family
attended the taping of the President's weekly radio
address and had photos taken with the President. On
August 18, Ms. Lewinsky attended the President's 50th
birthday party at Radio City Music Hall, and she got
into a cocktail party for major donors where she saw
the President. According to Ms.  Lewinsky, when the
President reached past her at the rope line to shake
hands with another guest, she reached out and touched
his crotch in a "playful" fashion.  On October 23,
according to Ms. Lewinsky, she talked with the
President at a fundraiser for Senate Democrats. The two
were photographed together at the event. The President
was wearing a necktie she had given him, according to
Ms. Lewinsky, and she said to him, "Hey, Handsome -- I
like your tie." The President telephoned her that
night. She said she planned to be at the White House on
Pentagon business the next day, and he told her to stop
by the Oval Office. At the White House the next day,
Ms. Lewinsky did not see the President because
Ms. Lieberman was nearby. On December 17, Ms. Lewinsky
attended a holiday reception at the White House. A
photo shows her shaking hands with the President.

E. Ms. Lewinsky's Frustrations

Continuing to believe that her relationship with the
President was the key to regaining her White House
pass, Ms. Lewinsky hoped that the President would get
her a job immediately after the election. "I kept a
calendar with a countdown until election day," she
later wrote in an unsent letter to him. The letter
states:

I was so sure that the weekend after the election you
would call me to come visit and you would kiss me
passionately and tell me you couldn't wait to have me
back. You'd ask me where I wanted to work and say
something akin to "Consider it done" and it would be.
Instead I didn't hear from you for weeks and
subsequently your phone calls became less frequent.

Ms. Lewinsky grew increasingly frustrated over her
relationship with President Clinton. One friend
understood that Ms. Lewinsky complained to the
President about not having seen each other privately
for months, and he replied, "Every day can't be
sunshine." In email to another friend in early 1997,
Ms. Lewinsky wrote: "I just don't understand what went
wrong, what happened? How could he do this to me? Why
did he keep up contact with me for so long and now
nothing, now when we could be together?"

    VI. Early 1997: Resumption of Sexual Encounters

In 1997, President Clinton and Ms. Lewinsky had further
private meetings, which now were arranged by Betty
Currie, the President's secretary. After the taping of
the President's weekly radio address on February 28,
the President and Ms. Lewinsky had a sexual
encounter. On March 24, they had what proved to be
their final sexual encounter. Throughout this period,
Ms. Lewinsky continued to press for a job at the White
House, to no avail.

A. Resumption of Meetings with the President

1. Role of Betty Currie

a. Arranging Meetings

In 1997, with the presidential election past, Ms.
Lewinsky and the President resumed their one-on-one
meetings and sexual encounters. The President's
secretary, Betty Currie, acted as intermediary.

According to Ms. Currie, Ms. Lewinsky would often call
her and say she wanted to see the President, sometimes
to discuss a particular topic. Ms. Currie would ask
President Clinton, and, if he agreed, arrange the
meeting. Ms. Currie also said it was "not unusual" that
Ms. Lewinsky would talk by phone with the President and
then call Ms. Currie to set up a meeting. At times,
Ms. Currie placed calls to Ms. Lewinsky for President
Clinton and put him on the line.

The meetings between the President and Ms. Lewinsky
often occurred on weekends. When Ms. Lewinsky would
arrive at the White House, Ms. Currie generally would
be the one to authorize her entry and take her to the
West Wing. Ms. Currie acknowledged that she sometimes
would come to the White House for the sole purpose of
having Ms. Lewinsky admitted and bringing her to see
the President. According to Ms. Currie, Ms. Lewinsky
and the President were alone together in the Oval
Office or the study for 15 to 20 minutes on multiple
occasions.

Secret Service officers and agents took note of Ms.
Currie's role. Officer Steven Pape once observed Ms.
Currie come to the White House for the duration of Ms.
Lewinsky's visit, then leave. When calling to alert the
officer at the West Wing lobby that Ms. Lewinsky was en
route, Ms. Currie would sometimes say, "[Y]ou know who
it is." On one occasion, Ms. Currie instructed Officer
Brent Chinery to hold Ms. Lewinsky at the lobby for a
few minutes because she needed to move the President to
the study. On another occasion, Ms.  Currie told
Officer Chinery to have Ms. Lewinsky held at the gate
for 30 to 40 minutes because the President already had
a visitor.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she once asked the
President why Ms. Currie had to clear her in, and why
he could not do so himself. "[H]e said because if
someone comes to see him, there's a list circulated
among the staff members and then everyone would be
questioning why I was there to see him."

b. Intermediary for Gifts

Ms. Lewinsky also sent over a number of packages -- six
or eight, Ms. Currie estimated. According to Ms.
Currie, Ms. Lewinsky would call and say she was sending
something for the President. The package would arrive
addressed to Ms. Currie. Courier receipts show that
Ms. Lewinsky sent seven packages to the White House
between October 7 and December 8, 1997.  Evidence
indicates that Ms. Lewinsky on occasion also dropped
parcels off with Ms. Currie or had a family member do
so, and brought gifts to the President when visiting
him. Ms. Currie testified that most packages from
Ms. Lewinsky were intended for the President.

Although Ms. Currie generally opened letters and
parcels to the President, she did not open these
packages from Ms. Lewinsky. She testified that "I made
the determination not to open" such letters and
packages because "I felt [they were] probably
personal."  Instead, she would leave the package in the
President's box, and "[h]e would pick it up." To the
best of her knowledge, such parcels always reached the
President.

c. Secrecy

Ms. Currie testified that she suspected impropriety in
the President's relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. She
told the grand jury that she "had concern." In her
words: "[H]e was spending a lot of time with a
24-year-old young lady. I know he has said that young
people keep him involved in what's happening in the
world, so I knew that was one reason, but there was a
concern of mine that she was spending more time than
most." Ms. Currie understood that "the majority" of the
President's meetings with Ms. Lewinsky were "more
personal in nature as opposed to business."

Ms. Currie also testified that she tried to avoid
learning details of the relationship between the
President and Ms. Lewinsky. On one occasion, Ms.
Lewinsky said of herself and the President, "As long as
no one saw us -- and no one did -- then nothing
happened." Ms. Currie responded: "Don't want to hear
it.  Don't say any more. I don't want to hear any
more."

Ms. Currie helped keep the relationship secret. When
the President wanted to talk with Ms. Lewinsky,
Ms. Currie would dial the call herself rather than go
through White House operators, who keep logs of
presidential calls made through the switchboard. When
Ms. Lewinsky phoned and Ms. Currie put the President on
the line, she did not log the call, though the standard
procedure was to note all calls, personal and
professional.  According to Secret Service uniformed
officers, Ms.  Currie sometimes tried to persuade them
to admit Ms.  Lewinsky to the White House compound
without making a record of it.

In addition, Ms. Currie avoided writing down or
retaining most messages from Ms. Lewinsky to the
President. In response to a grand jury subpoena, the
White House turned over only one note to the President
concerning Ms. Lewinsky -- whereas evidence indicates
that Ms. Lewinsky used Ms. Currie to convey requests
and messages to the President on many occasions.

When bringing Ms. Lewinsky in from the White House
gate, Ms. Currie said she sometimes chose a path that
would reduce the likelihood of being seen by two White
House employees who disapproved of Ms. Lewinsky:
Stephen Goodin and Nancy Hernreich. Ms. Currie
testified that she once brought Ms. Lewinsky directly
to the study, "sneaking her back" via a roundabout path
to avoid running into Mr. Goodin. When Ms. Lewinsky
visited the White House on weekends and at night, being
spotted was not a problem -- in Ms. Currie's words,
"there would be no need to sneak" -- so Ms. Lewinsky
would await the President in Ms. Currie's office.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she once expressed concern
about records showing the President's calls to her, and
Ms. Currie told her not to worry. Ms. Lewinsky also
suspected that Ms. Currie was not logging in all of her
gifts to the President. In Ms. Lewinsky's evaluation,
many White House staff members tried to regulate the
President's behavior, but Ms. Currie generally did as
he wished.

2. Observations by Secret Service Officers

Officers of the Secret Service Uniformed Division noted
Ms. Lewinsky's 1997 visits to the White House. From
radio traffic about the President's movements, several
officers observed that the President often would head
for the Oval Office within minutes of Ms. Lewinsky's
entry to the complex, especially on weekends, and some
noted that he would return to the Residence a short
time after her departure. "It was just like clockwork,"
according to one officer. Concerned about the
President's reputation, another officer suggested
putting Ms. Lewinsky on a list of people who were not
to be admitted to the White House. A commander
responded that it was none of their business whom the
President chose to see, and, in any event, nobody would
ever find out about Ms. Lewinsky.

B. Valentine's Day Advertisement

On February 14, 1997, the Washington Post published a
Valentine's Day "Love Note" that Ms. Lewinsky had
placed. The ad said:

HANDSOME

With love's light wings did

I o'er perch these walls

For stony limits cannot hold love out,

And what love can do that dares love attempt.

-- Romeo and Juliet 2:2

Happy Valentine's Day.

M

C. February 24 Message

On February 24, Ms. Lewinsky visited the White House on
Pentagon business. She went by Ms. Currie's
office. Ms. Currie sent a note to the President -- the
only such note turned over by the White House in
response to a grand jury subpoena: "Monica Lewinsky
stopped by. Do you want me to call her?"

D. February 28 Sexual Encounter

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President had a
sexual encounter on Thursday, February 28 -- their
first in nearly 11 months. White House records show
that Ms.  Lewinsky attended the taping of the
President's weekly radio address on February 28. She
was at the White House from 5:48 to 7:07 p.m. The
President was in the Roosevelt Room (where the radio
address was taped) from 6:29 to 6:36 p.m., then moved
to the Oval Office, where he remained until 7:24
p.m. He had no telephone calls while Ms. Lewinsky was
in the White House.

Wearing a navy blue dress from the Gap, Ms. Lewinsky
attended the radio address at the President's
invitation (relayed by Ms. Currie), then had her photo
taken with the President. Ms. Lewinsky had not been
alone with the President since she had worked at the
White House, and, she testified, "I was really
nervous."  President Clinton told her to see Ms. Currie
after the photo was taken because he wanted to give her
something. "So I waited a little while for him and then
Betty and the President and I went into the back
office," Ms. Lewinsky testified. (She later learned
that the reason Ms. Currie accompanied them was that
Stephen Goodin did not want the President to be alone
with Ms. Lewinsky, a view that Mr. Goodin expressed to
the President and Ms. Currie.) Once they had passed
from the Oval Office toward the private study, Ms.
Currie said, "I'll be right back," and walked on to the
back pantry or the dining room, where, according to Ms.
Currie, she waited for 15 to 20 minutes while the
President and Ms. Lewinsky were in the study. Ms.
Currie (who said she acted on her own initiative)
testified that she accompanied the President and Ms.
Lewinsky out of the Oval Office because "I didn't want
any perceptions, him being alone with someone."

In the study, according to Ms. Lewinsky, the President
"started to say something to me and I was pestering him
to kiss me, because . . . it had been a long time since
we had been alone." The President told her to wait a
moment, as he had presents for her. As belated
Christmas gifts, he gave her a hat pin and a special
edition of Walt Whitman's Leaves of Grass.

Ms. Lewinsky described the Whitman book as "the most
sentimental gift he had given me . . . it's beautiful
and it meant a lot to me." During this visit, according
to Ms. Lewinsky, the President said he had seen her
Valentine's Day message in the Washington Post, and he
talked about his fondness for "Romeo and Juliet."

Ms. Lewinsky testified that after the President gave
her the gifts, they had a sexual encounter:

[W]e went back over by the bathroom in the hallway, and
we kissed. We were kissing and he unbuttoned my dress
and fondled my breasts with my bra on, and then took
them out of my bra and was kissing them and touching
them with his hands and with his mouth.

And then I think I was touching him in his genital area
through his pants, and I think I unbuttoned his shirt
and was kissing his chest. And then . . . I wanted to
perform oral sex on him . . . and so I did. And then
. .  . I think he heard something, or he heard someone
in the office. So, we moved into the bathroom.

And I continued to perform oral sex and then he pushed
me away, kind of as he always did before he came, and
then I stood up and I said . . . I care about you so
much; . . . I don't understand why you won't let me . .
. make you come; it's important to me; I mean, it just
doesn't feel complete, it doesn't seem right.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she and the President
hugged, and "he said he didn't want to get addicted to
me, and he didn't want me to get addicted to him." They
looked at each other for a moment. Then, saying that "I
don't want to disappoint you," the President
consented. For the first time, she performed oral sex
through completion.

When Ms. Lewinsky next took the navy blue Gap dress
from her closet to wear it, she noticed stains near one
hip and on the chest. FBI Laboratory tests revealed
that the stains are the President's semen.

In his grand jury testimony, the President -- who,
because the OIC had asked him for a blood sample (and
had represented that it had ample evidentiary
justification for making such a request), had reason to
suspect that Ms. Lewinsky's dress might bear traces of
his semen -- indicated that he and Ms. Lewinsky had had
sexual contact on the day of the radio address. He
testified:

I was sick after it was over and I, I was pleased at
that time that it had been nearly a year since any
inappropriate contact had occurred with Ms. Lewinsky. I
promised myself it wasn't going to happen again. The
facts are complicated about what did happen and how it
happened. But, nonetheless, I'm responsible for it.

Later the President added, referring to the evening of
the radio address: "I do believe that I was alone with
her from 15 to 20 minutes. I do believe that things
happened then which were inappropriate." He said of the
intimate relationship with Ms. Lewinsky: "I never
should have started it, and I certainly shouldn't have
started it back after I resolved not to in 1996."

E. March 29 Sexual Encounter

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she had what proved to be
her final sexual encounter with the President on
Saturday, March 29, 1997. Records show that she was at
the White House from 2:03 to 3:16 p.m., admitted by Ms.
Currie. The President was in the Oval Office during
this period (he left shortly after Ms. Lewinsky did, at
3:24 p.m.), and he did not have any phone calls during
her White House visit.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, Ms. Currie arranged the
meeting after the President said by telephone that he
had something important to tell her. At the White
House, Ms. Currie took her to the study to await the
President.  He came in on crutches, the result of a
knee injury in Florida two weeks earlier.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, their sexual encounter began
with a sudden kiss: "[T]his was another one of those
occasions when I was babbling on about something, and
he just kissed me, kind of to shut me up, I think."
The President unbuttoned her blouse and touched her
breasts without removing her bra. "[H]e went to go put
his hand down my pants, and then I unzipped them
because it was easier. And I didn't have any panties
on.  And so he manually stimulated me." According to
Ms.  Lewinsky, "I wanted him to touch my genitals with
his genitals," and he did so, lightly and without
penetration. Then Ms. Lewinsky performed oral sex on
him, again until he ejaculated.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President had a
lengthy conversation that day. He told her that he
suspected that a foreign embassy (he did not specify
which one) was tapping his telephones, and he proposed
cover stories. If ever questioned, she should say that
the two of them were just friends. If anyone ever asked
about their phone sex, she should say that they knew
their calls were being monitored all along, and the
phone sex was just a put-on.

In his grand jury testimony, the President implicitly
denied this encounter. He acknowledged "inappropriate
intimate contact" with Ms. Lewinsky "on certain
occasions in early 1996 and once in early 1997."  The
President indicated that "the one occasion in 1997" was
the radio address.

F. Continuing Job Efforts

With the 1996 election past, meanwhile, Ms. Lewinsky
had continued striving to get a job at the White
House. She testified that she first broached the issue
in a telephone call with the President in January 1997,
and he said he would speak to Bob Nash, Director of
Presidential Personnel. She understood that Mr.  Nash
was supposed to "find a position for me to come back to
the White House."

Over the months that followed, Ms. Lewinsky repeatedly
asked the President to get her a White House job. In
her recollection, the President replied that various
staff members were working on it, including Mr. Nash
and Marsha Scott, Deputy Assistant to the President and
Deputy Director for Presidential Personnel.  According
to Ms. Lewinsky, the President told her:

"Bob Nash is handling it," "Marsha's going to handle
it" and "We just sort of need to be careful." You know,
and . . . he would always sort of . . . validate what I
was feeling by telling me something that I don't
necessarily know is true. "Oh, I'll talk to her," "I'll
-- you know, I'll see blah, blah, blah," and it was
just "I'll do," "I'll do," "I'll do." And didn't,
didn't, didn't.

Ms. Lewinsky came to wonder if she was being "strung
along."

Testifying before the grand jury, the President
acknowledged that Ms. Lewinsky had complained to him
about her job situation:

You know, she tried for months and months to get a job
back in the White House, not so much in the West Wing
but somewhere in the White House complex, including the
Old Executive Office Building. . . . She very much
wanted to come back. And she interviewed for some jobs
but never got one. She was, from time to time, upset
about it.

   VII. May 1997: Termination of Sexual Relationship

In May 1997, amid indications that Ms. Lewinsky had
been indiscreet, President Clinton terminated the
sexual relationship.

A. Questions about Ms. Lewinsky's Discretion

In April or May 1997, according to Ms. Lewinsky, the
President asked if she had told her mother about their
intimate relationship. She responded: "No. Of course
not." (In truth, she had told her mother.) The
President indicated that Ms. Lewinsky's mother possibly
had said something about the nature of the relationship
to Walter Kaye, who had mentioned it to Marsha Scott,
who in turn had alerted the President.

Corroborating Ms. Lewinsky's account, Mr. Kaye
testified that he told Ms. Lewinsky's aunt, Debra
Finerman, that he understood that "her niece was very
aggressive," a remark that angered
Ms. Finerman. Ms. Finerman told Mr.  Kaye that the
President was the true aggressor: He was telephoning
Ms. Lewinsky late at night. Ms. Finerman, in Mr. Kaye's
recollection, attributed this information to Marcia
Lewis, Ms. Lewinsky's mother (and Ms. Finerman's
sister). Mr. Kaye -- who had disbelieved stories he had
heard from Democratic National Committee people about
an affair between Ms. Lewinsky and the President --
testified that he was "shocked" to hear of the
late-night phone calls.

B. May 24: Break-up

On Saturday, May 24, 1997, according to Ms. Lewinsky,
the President ended their intimate relationship. Ms.
Lewinsky was at the White House that day from 12:21 to
1:54 p.m. The President was in the Oval Office during
most of this period, from 11:59 a.m. to 1:47 p.m. He
did not have any telephone calls.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she got a call from Ms.
Currie at about 11 a.m. that day, inviting her to come
to the White House at about 1 p.m. Ms. Lewinsky arrived
wearing a straw hat with the hat pin the President had
given her, and bringing gifts for him, including a
puzzle and a Banana Republic shirt. She gave him the
gifts in the dining room, and they moved to the area of
the study.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President explained that
they had to end their intimate relationship.  Earlier
in his marriage, he told her, he had had hundreds of
affairs; but since turning 40, he had made a concerted
effort to be faithful. He said he was attracted to
Ms. Lewinsky, considered her a great person, and hoped
they would remain friends. He pointed out that he could
do a great deal for her. The situation, he stressed,
was not Ms. Lewinsky's fault. Ms. Lewinsky, weeping,
tried to persuade the President not to end the sexual
relationship, but he was unyielding, then and
subsequently. Although she and the President kissed and
hugged thereafter, according to Ms. Lewinsky, the
sexual relationship was over.

Three days after this meeting, on May 27, 1997, the
Supreme Court unanimously rejected President Clinton's
claim that the Constitution immunized him from civil
lawsuits. The Court ordered the sexual harassment case
Jones v. Clinton to proceed.

VIII. June-October 1997: Continuing Meetings and Calls

Ms. Lewinsky tried to return to the White House staff
and to revive her sexual relationship with the
President, but she failed at both.

A. Continuing Job Efforts

Although Ms. Lewinsky was not offered another White
House job, some testimony indicates that the President
tried to get her one.

According to Betty Currie, the President instructed her
and Marsha Scott to help Ms. Lewinsky find a White
House job. Ms. Currie testified that she resisted the
request, because her opinion of Ms. Lewinsky had
shifted over time. At first, she testified, she
considered Ms.  Lewinsky "a friend" who "had been
wronged" and had been "maligned improperly." But
"[l]ater on, I considered her as a pain in the neck,
more or less." The change of heart resulted in part
from Ms. Currie's many phone calls in 1997 from
Ms. Lewinsky, who was often distraught and sometimes in
tears over her inability to get in touch with the
President.  Deeming her "a little bit pushy,"
Ms. Currie argued against bringing Ms. Lewinsky back to
work at the White House, but the President told her and
Ms. Scott, in Ms.  Currie's words, "to still pursue her
coming back."  Indeed, according to Ms. Currie, the
President "was pushing us hard" on the matter. To the
best of Ms.  Currie's recollection, it was the only
time the President instructed her to try to get someone
a White House job.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President told her to
talk with Ms. Scott about a White House job in spring
1997. On June 16, she met with Ms. Scott. The meeting
did not go as Ms. Lewinsky anticipated. She later
recounted in an email message:

There is most certainly a disconnect on what [the
President] said he told her and how she acted. She
didn't even know what my title or my job was
. . . . She didn't have any job openings to
offer. Instead, she made me go over what happened when
I had to leave (who told me), and then proceeded to
confirm the Evelyn [Lieberman] story about my
"inappropriate behavior."  Then she asked me: with such
nasty women there and people gossiping about me, why
did I want to come back?  I was so upset. I really did
not feel it was her place to question me about
that. Later on, I said something about being told I
could come back after November and she wanted to know
who told me that! So I have placed a call to him but I
don't know what is going to happen.

Ms. Lewinsky added that she was inclined "to walk away
from it all," but acknowledged that "I'm always saying
this and then I change my mind."

Though she characterized her recollection as "all
jumbled," Ms. Scott corroborated much of Ms. Lewinsky's
account. Ms. Scott said that at some point she did ask
Ms. Lewinsky why she wanted to return to the White
House. Ms. Scott also said that she was unaware of
Ms. Lewinsky's job title before their meeting.

Over the next three weeks, Ms. Lewinsky tried
repeatedly, without success, to talk with the President
about her job quest. In a draft of a letter to Ms.
Currie, she wrote that the President "said to me that
he had told [Ms. Scott] I had gotten a bum deal, and I
should get a good job in the West Wing," but Ms. Scott
did not seem eager to arrange for Ms. Lewinsky's
return.  Ms. Lewinsky wrote:

I was surprised that she would question his judgment
and not just do what he asked of her. Is it possible
that, in fact, he did not tell her that? Does he really
not want me back in the complex? He has not responded
to my note, nor has he called me. Do you know what is
going on? If so, are you able to share it with me?

Ms. Currie testified to "a vague recollection" of
having seen this letter.

On June 29, 1997, Ms. Lewinsky wrote several notes. In
a draft letter to Ms. Scott, Ms. Lewinsky wrote that
"our last conversation was very upsetting to me," and
added:

Marsha, I was told that I could come back after the
election. I knew why I had to leave last year by
mid-April, and I have been beyond patient since then. I
do not think it is fair to . . . be told by the person
whom I was told would get me a job that there is
nothing for me and she doesn't really hear about
positions [in] the complex anyway. I know that in your
eyes I am just a hindrance -- a woman who doesn't have
a certain someone's best interests at heart, but please
trust me when I say I do.

Ms. Lewinsky also drafted a note to the President
pleading for a brief meeting the following Tuesday.
Referring to her inability to get in touch with him,
she wrote: "Please do not do this to me. I feel
disposable, used and insignificant. I understand your
hands are tied, but I want to talk to you and look at
some options." Around this time, Ms. Lewinsky told a
friend that she was considering moving to another city
or country.

B. July 3 Letter

"[V]ery frustrated" over her inability to get in touch
with the President to discuss her job situation, Ms.
Lewinsky wrote him a peevish letter on July 3,
1997. Opening "Dear Sir," the letter took the President
to task for breaking his promise to get her another
White House job. Ms. Lewinsky also obliquely threatened
to disclose their relationship. If she was not going to
return to work at the White House, she wrote, then she
would "need to explain to my parents exactly why that
wasn't happening." Some explanation was necessary
because she had told her parents that she would be
brought back after the election. (Ms.  Lewinsky
testified that she would not actually have told her
father about the relationship -- she had already told
her mother -- but she wanted to remind the President
that she had "left the White House like a good girl in
April of '96," whereas other people might have
threatened disclosure in order to retain the job.)

Ms. Lewinsky also raised the possibility of a job
outside Washington. If returning to the White House was
impossible, she asked in this letter, could he get her
a job at the United Nations in New York? It was the
first time that she had told the President that she was
considering moving.

Although not questioned about this particular letter,
the President testified that he believed Ms. Lewinsky
might disclose their intimate relationship once he
stopped it. He testified:

After I terminated the improper contact with her, she
wanted to come in more than she did. She got angry when
she didn't get in sometimes. I knew that that might
make her more likely to speak, and I still did it
because I had to limit the contact.

After receiving the July 3 letter, though, the
President agreed to see Ms. Lewinsky. In her account,
Ms. Currie called that afternoon and told her to come
to the White House at 9 a.m. the next day.

C. July 4 Meeting

On Friday, July 4, 1997, Ms. Lewinsky had what she
characterized as a "very emotional" visit with the
President. Records show that Ms. Lewinsky entered the
White House at 8:51 a.m.; no exit time is
recorded. Logs indicate that the President was in the
Oval Office from 8:40 until after 11 a.m.

In Ms. Lewinsky's recollection, their meeting began
contentiously, with the President scolding her: "[I]t's
illegal to threaten the President of the United
States." He then told her that he had not read her July
3 letter beyond the "Dear Sir" line; he surmised that
it was threatening because Ms. Currie looked upset when
she brought it to him. (Ms. Lewinsky suspected that he
actually had read the whole thing.) Ms. Lewinsky
complained about his failure to get her a White House
job after her long wait. Although the President claimed
he wanted to be her friend, she said, he was not acting
like it. Ms. Lewinsky began weeping, and the President
hugged her. While they hugged, she spotted a gardener
outside the study window, and they moved into the
hallway by the bathroom.

There, the President was "the most affectionate with me
he'd ever been," Ms. Lewinsky testified. He stroked her
arm, toyed with her hair, kissed her on the neck,
praised her intellect and beauty. In Ms. Lewinsky's
recollection:

[H]e remarked . . . that he wished he had more time for
me. And so I said, well, maybe you will have more time
in three years. And I was . . . thinking just when he
wasn't President, he was going to have more time on his
hands. And he said, well, I don't know, I might be
alone in three years. And then I said something about
. . . us sort of being together. I think I kind of
said, oh, I think we'd be a good team, or something
like that. And he . . . jokingly said, well, what are
we going to do when I'm 75 and I have to pee 25 times a
day? And . . .  I told him that we'd deal with
that. . . .

Ms. Lewinsky testified that "I left that day sort of
emotionally stunned," for "I just knew he was in love
with me."

Just before leaving, according to Ms. Lewinsky, she
told the President "that I wanted to talk to him about
something serious and that while I didn't want to be
the one to talk about this with him, I thought it was
important he know." She informed him that Newsweek was
working on an article about Kathleen Willey, a former
White House volunteer who claimed that the President
had sexually harassed her during a private meeting in
the Oval Office on November 23, 1993. (Ms.  Lewinsky
knew of the article from Ms. Tripp, who had worked at
the White House at the time of the alleged incident and
had heard about the incident from Ms.  Willey. Michael
Isikoff of Newsweek had talked with Ms.  Tripp about
the episode in March 1997 and again shortly before July
4, and Ms. Tripp had subsequently related the Isikoff
conversations to Ms. Lewinsky.) Ms.  Lewinsky told the
President what she had learned from Ms. Tripp (whom she
did not name), including the fact that Ms. Tripp had
tried to get in touch with Deputy White House Counsel
Bruce Lindsey, who had not returned her calls.

Ms. Lewinsky testified about why she conveyed this
information to the President: "I was concerned that the
President had no idea this was going on and that this
woman was going to be another Paula Jones and he didn't
really need that." She understood that Ms. Willey was
looking for a job, and she thought that the President
might be able to "make this go away" by finding her a
job.

The President responded that the harassment allegation
was ludicrous, because he would never approach a
small-breasted woman like Ms. Willey. He further said
that, during the previous week, Ms. Willey had called
Nancy Hernreich to warn that a reporter was working on
a story about Ms. Willey and the President; Ms. Willey
wondered how she could get out of it.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President had no
telephone calls during her time with him. At 10:19
a.m., probably after her departure (her exit time is
not shown on logs), he placed two calls, both
potentially follow-ups to the conversation about the
Newsweek article. First, he spoke with Bruce Lindsey
for three minutes, then with Nancy Hernreich for 11
minutes.

D. July 14-15 Discussions of Linda Tripp

On the evening of Monday, July 14, 1997, just after Ms.
Lewinsky had returned from an overseas trip, the
President had her come to the White House to discuss
Linda Tripp and Newsweek. Ms. Lewinsky entered the
White House at 9:34 p.m. and exited at 11:22 p.m.  The
President was in the Oval Office area from 9:28 to
11:25 p.m.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that, at around 7:30 p.m. that
evening, Ms. Currie telephoned and said that the
President wanted to talk to her or see her. At about
8:30 or 9:00 p.m., Ms. Currie called again and asked
Ms.  Lewinsky to come to the White House.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that the President met her in
Ms.  Currie's office, then took her into
Ms. Hernreich's office. (Records show that seven
minutes after Ms.  Lewinsky's entry to the White House
complex, the President left the Oval Office for the
appointment secretary's office.) According to
Ms. Lewinsky:

It was an unusual meeting . . . . It was very distant
and very cold. . . . [A]t one point he asked me if the
woman that I had mentioned on July 4th was Linda Tripp.
And I hesitated and then answered yes, and he talked
about that there was some issue . . . to do with
Kathleen Willey and that, as he called it, that there
was something on the Sludge Report, that there had been
some information.

The President told Ms. Lewinsky that Ms. Willey had
called the White House again, this time to report that
Mr. Isikoff somehow knew of her earlier White House
call. The President wondered if Ms. Lewinsky had
mentioned the Willey call to Ms. Tripp, who in turn
might have told Mr. Isikoff. Ms. Lewinsky acknowledged
that she had done so. Ms. Lewinsky testified: "[H]e was
concerned about Linda, and I reassured him. He asked me
if I trusted her, and I said yes." The President asked
Ms. Lewinsky to try to persuade Ms. Tripp to call
Mr. Lindsey. The President, according to Ms.  Lewinsky,
also asked if she had confided anything about their
relationship to Ms. Tripp. Ms. Lewinsky said (falsely)
that she had not.

The President left to participate in a conference call,
which Ms. Lewinsky understood was with his attorneys,
while Ms. Lewinsky sat with Ms. Currie. According to
White House records, at 10:03 p.m. the President
participated in a 51-minute conference call with Robert
Bennett, his private attorney in the Jones case, and
Charles Ruff, White House Counsel. Immediately after
completing that call, the President had a six-minute
phone conversation with Bruce Lindsey.

Afterward, the President returned and told
Ms. Lewinsky, in her recollection, to notify Ms. Currie
the following day, "without getting into details with
her, even mentioning names with her," whether
Ms. Lewinsky had "'mission-accomplished' . . . with
Linda."

The next day, according to Ms. Lewinsky, she did talk
with Ms. Tripp, then called Ms. Currie and said she
needed to talk with the President. He called her that
evening. She told him "that I had tried to talk to
Linda and that she didn't seem very receptive to trying
to get in touch with Bruce Lindsey again, but that I
would continue to try." The President was in a sour
mood, according to Ms. Lewinsky, and their conversation
was brief.

E. July 16 Meeting with Marsha Scott

On July 16, 1997, Ms. Lewinsky met again with Ms. Scott
about returning to the White House. Ms. Scott said she
would try to detail Ms. Lewinsky from the Pentagon to
Ms. Scott's office on a temporary basis, according to
Ms. Lewinsky. In that way, Ms. Scott said, Ms.
Lewinsky could prove herself. Ms. Scott also said that
"they had to be careful and protect [the President]."
Both Ms. Scott and Ms. Currie confirmed that Ms. Scott
talked with Ms. Lewinsky about the possibility of being
detailed to work at the White House. Ms. Scott
testified that she tried to arrange the detail on her
own, without any direction from the President;
Ms. Currie, however, testified that the President
instructed her and Ms. Scott to try to get Ms. Lewinsky
a job.

F. July 24 Meeting

On Thursday, July 24, 1997, the day after her 24th
birthday, Ms. Lewinsky visited the White House from
6:04 to 6:26 p.m., admitted by Ms. Currie. The
President was in the Oval Office when she arrived; he
moved to the study at 6:14 p.m. and remained there
until her departure. He had no telephone calls during
Ms.  Lewinsky's visit.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she went to the White House
to pick up a photograph from Ms. Currie, who said the
President might be available for a quick meeting. Ms.
Currie put Ms. Lewinsky in the Cabinet Room while the
President finished another meeting, then took her to
see him. They chatted for five to ten minutes, and the
President gave Ms. Lewinsky, as a birthday present, an
antique pin.

G. Newsweek Article and Its Aftermath

Newsweek published the Kathleen Willey story in its
August 11, 1997, edition (which appeared a week before
the cover date). The article quoted Ms. Tripp as saying
that Ms. Willey, after leaving the Oval Office on the
day of the President's alleged advances, looked
"disheveled," "flustered, happy, and joyful." The
article also quoted Robert Bennett as saying that Ms.
Tripp was "not to be believed."

After the article appeared, Ms. Tripp wrote a letter to
Newsweek charging that she had been misquoted, but the
magazine did not publish it. Ms. Lewinsky subsequently
told the President about Ms. Tripp's letter. He
replied, Ms. Lewinsky said in a recorded conversation,
"Well, that's good because it sure seemed like she
screwed me from that article."

H. August 16 Meeting

On Saturday, August 16, 1997, Ms. Lewinsky tried,
unsuccessfully, to resume her sexual relationship with
the President. She visited the White House on that day
from 9:02 to 10:20 a.m. The President moved from the
Residence to the Oval Office at 9:20 a.m. and remained
in the Oval Office until 10:03 a.m. After a one-minute
call to Betty Currie at her desk at 9:18 a.m.,
evidently from the Residence, the President had no
calls while Ms. Lewinsky was at the White House.  The
next day he left for a vacation on Martha's Vineyard.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she brought birthday gifts
for the President (his birthday is August 19):

I had set up in his back office, I had brought an apple
square and put a candle and had put his birthday
presents out. And after he came back in and I sang
happy birthday and he got his presents, I asked him
. . . if we could share a birthday kiss in honor of our
birthdays, because mine had been just a few weeks
before. So, he said that that was okay and we could
kind of bend the rules that day. And so . . . we
kissed.

Ms. Lewinsky touched the President's genitals through
his pants and moved to perform oral sex, but the
President rebuffed her. In her recollection: "[H]e
said, I'm trying not to do this and I'm trying to be
good. . . . [H]e got visibly upset. And so . . . I
hugged him and I told him I was sorry and not to be
upset." Later, in a draft note to "Handsome," Ms.
Lewinsky referred to this visit: "It was awful when I
saw you for your birthday in August. You were so
distant that I missed you as I was holding you in my
arms."

I. Continuing Job Efforts

Ms. Lewinsky and Ms. Scott talked by phone on September
3, 1997, for 47 minutes. According to notes that
Ms. Lewinsky wrote to two friends, Ms. Scott told her
that the detail slot in her office had been
eliminated. Ms. Lewinsky told one friend:

So for now, there isn't any place for me to be
detailed.  So I should be PATIENT. I told her I was
very upset and disappointed (even though I really
didn't want to work for her) and then she and I got
into it. She didn't understand why I wanted to come
back when there were still people there who would give
me a hard time and that it isn't the right political
climate for me to come back. . . . She asked me why I
kept pushing the envelope on coming back there -- after
all, I had the experience of being there already. So
it's over. I don't know what I will do now but I can't
wait any more and I can't go through all of this crap
anymore. In some ways I hope I never hear from him
again because he'll just lead me on because he doesn't
have the balls to tell me the truth.

Ms. Scott testified that "[t]he gist" of Ms. Lewinsky's
email message describing the conversation "fits with
what I remember telling her."

Ms. Lewinsky expressed her escalating frustration in a
note to the President that she drafted (but did not
send). She wrote:

I believe the time has finally come for me to throw in
the towel. My conversation with Marsha left me
disappointed, frustrated, sad and angry. I can't help
but wonder if you knew she wouldn't be able to detail
me over there when I last saw you. Maybe that would
explain your coldness. The only explanation I can
reason for your not bringing me back is that you just
plain didn't want to enough or care about me enough.

Ms. Lewinsky went on to discuss other women rumored to
be involved with the President who enjoy "golden
positions," above criticism, "because they have your
approval." She continued: "I just loved you -- wanted
to spend time with you, kiss you, listen to you laugh
-- and I wanted you to love me back." She closed: "As I
said in my last letter to you I've waited long enough.
You and Marsha win. I give up. You let me down, but I

shouldn't have trusted you in the first place.

Ms. Lewinsky continued trying to discuss her situation
with the President. On Friday, September 12, 1997, she
arrived at the White House without an appointment,
called Ms. Currie, and had a long wait at the
gate. When Ms. Currie came to meet her, Ms. Lewinsky
was crying.  Ms. Currie explained that sometimes the
President's hands are tied -- but, she said, she had
gotten his authorization to ask John Podesta, the
Deputy Chief of Staff, to help Ms. Lewinsky return to
work at the White House.

J. Black Dog Gifts

Before the President had left for vacation,
Ms. Lewinsky had sent a note asking if he could bring
her a T-shirt from the Black Dog, a popular Vineyard
restaurant.  In early September, Ms. Currie gave
several Black Dog items to Ms. Lewinsky. In an email
message to Catherine Davis, Ms. Lewinsky wrote: "Well,
I found out from Betty yesterday that he not only
brought me a t-shirt, he got me 2 t-shirts, a hat and a
dress!!!!  Even though he's a big schmuck, that is
surprisingly sweet -- even that he remembered!"

K. Lucy Mercer Letter and Involvement of Chief of Staff

A letter dated September 30, 1997, styled as an
official memo, was found in Ms. Lewinsky's
apartment. According to Ms. Lewinsky, she sent this
letter or a similar one to the President. Addressed to
"Handsome" and bearing the subject line "The New Deal,"
the faux memo proposed a visit that evening after
"everyone else goes home." Ms. Lewinsky wrote: "You
will show me that you will let me visit you sans a
crisis, and I will be on my best behavior and not
stressed out when I come (to see you, that is)." She
closed with an allusion to a woman rumored to have been
involved with an earlier President: "Oh, and Handsome,
remember FDR would never have turned down a visit with
Lucy Mercer!"

Ms. Lewinsky did not visit the White House the night of
September 30, but the President called her late the
night of September 30 or October 1. According to
Ms. Lewinsky, he may have mentioned during this call
that he would get Erskine Bowles to help her find a
White House job.

At around this time, the President did ask the White
House Chief of Staff to help in the job search. Mr.
Bowles testified about a conversation with the
President in the Oval Office: "He told me that there
was a young woman -- her name was Monica Lewinsky --
who used to work at the White House; that Evelyn
. . . thought she hung around the Oval Office too much
and transferred her to the Pentagon." The President
asked Mr. Bowles to try to find Ms. Lewinsky a job in
the Old Executive Office Building. Mr. Bowles assigned
his deputy, John Podesta, to handle it.

L. News of Job Search Failure

On October 6, 1997, according to Ms. Lewinsky, she was
told that she would never work at the White House
again.  Ms. Tripp conveyed the news, which she
indicated had come from a friend on the White House
staff. Ms.  Lewinsky testified:

Linda Tripp called me at work on October 6th and told
me that her friend Kate in the NSC . . . had heard
rumors about me and that I would never work in the
White House again . . . . [Kate's] advice to me was
"get out of town."

For Ms. Lewinsky, who had previously considered moving
to New York, this call was the "straw that broke the
camel's back." She was enraged.

In a note she drafted (but did not send), Ms. Lewinsky
expressed her frustration. She wrote:

Any normal person would have walked away from this and
said, "He doesn't call me, he doesn't want to see me --
screw it. It doesn't matter." I can't let go of
you. . .  . I want to be a source of pleasure and
laughter and energy to you. I want to make you smile.

She went on to relate that she had heard second-hand
from a White House employee "that I was 'after the
President' and would never be allowed to work [in] the
complex." Ms. Lewinsky said she could only conclude
"that all you have promised me is an empty promise. . .
. I am once again totally humiliated. It is very clear
that there is no way I am going to be brought back."
She closed the note: "I will never do anything to hurt
you.  I am simply not that kind of person. Moreover, I
love you."

When terminating their sexual relationship on May 24,
the President had told Ms. Lewinsky that he hoped they
would remain friends, for he could do a great deal for
her. Now, having learned that he could not (or would
not) get her a White House job, Ms. Lewinsky decided to
ask him for a job in New York, perhaps at the United
Nations -- a possibility that she had mentioned to him
in passing over the summer. On the afternoon of October
6, Ms. Lewinsky spoke of this plan to Ms.  Currie, who
quoted the President as having said earlier: "Oh,
that's no problem. We can place her in the UN like
that."

In a recorded conversation later on October 6, Ms.
Lewinsky said she wanted two things from the President.
The first was contrition: He needed to "acknowledge . .
. that he helped fuck up my life." The second was a
job, one that she could obtain without much effort: "I
don't want to have to work for this position . . . . I
just want it to be given to me." Ms. Lewinsky decided
to write the President a note proposing that the two of
them "get together and work on some way that I can come
out of this situation not feeling the way I do." After
composing the letter, she said: "I want him to feel a
little guilty, and I hope that this letter did that."

In this letter, which was sent via courier on October
7, Ms. Lewinsky said she understood that she would
never be given a White House job, and she asked for a
prompt meeting to discuss her job situation. She went
on to advance a specific request:

I'd like to ask you to help me secure a position in NY
beginning 1 December. I would be very grateful, and I
am hoping this is a solution for both of us. I want you
to know that it has always been and remains more
important to me to have you in my life than to come
back. . . .  Please don't let me down.

              IX. October-November 1997:

               United Nations' Job Offer

Having learned that she would not be able to return to
the White House, Ms. Lewinsky sought the President's
help in finding a job in New York City. The President
offered to place her at the United Nations. After
initial enthusiasm, Ms. Lewinsky cooled on the idea of
working at the U.N., and she prodded the President to
get her a job in the private sector.

A. October 10: Telephone Conversation

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President telephoned her
at approximately 2:00 to 2:30 a.m. on Friday, October
10. They spent much of the hour-and-a-half call
arguing. "[H]e got so mad at me, he must have been
purple," she later recalled.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President said: "If I
had known what kind of person you really were, I
wouldn't have gotten involved with you." He reminded
Ms.  Lewinsky that she had earlier promised, "[i]f you
just want to stop doing this, I'll

. . . be no trouble." Ms. Lewinsky said she challenged
the President: "[T]ell me . . . when I've caused you
trouble." The President responded, "I've never worried
about you. I've never been worried you would do
something to hurt me."

When the conversation shifted to her job search, Ms.
Lewinsky complained that the President had not done
enough to help her. He responded that, on the contrary,
he was eager to help. The President said that he
regretted Ms. Lewinsky's transfer to the Pentagon and
assured her that he would not have permitted it had he
foreseen the difficulty in returning her to the White
House. Ms. Lewinsky told him that she wanted a job in
New York by the end of October, and the President
promised to do what he could.

B. October 11 Meeting

At approximately 8:30 a.m. on Saturday, October 11,
according to Ms. Lewinsky, Ms. Currie called and told
her that the President wished to see her. Ms.  Lewinsky
entered the White House at 9:36 a.m. and departed at
10:54 a.m. The President entered the Oval Office at
9:52 a.m.

Ms. Lewinsky met with the President in the study, and
they discussed her job search. Ms. Lewinsky told the
President that she wanted to pursue jobs in the private
sector, and he told her to prepare a list of New York
companies that interested her. Ms. Lewinsky asked the
President whether Vernon Jordan, a well-known
Washington attorney who she knew was a close friend of
the President and had many business contacts, might
help her find a job. According to Ms. Lewinsky, the
President was receptive to the idea.

In a recorded conversation, Ms. Lewinsky said that, at
the end of the October 11 meeting, she and the
President joined Ms. Currie in the Oval Office. The
President grabbed Ms. Lewinsky's arm and kissed her on
the forehead. He told her: "I talked to Erskine
[Bowles] about . . . trying to get John Hilley to give
you . . . a good recommendation for your work here."

Later, Ms. Lewinsky and Ms. Tripp discussed their
concerns about the President's involvement in Ms.
Lewinsky's job search. Specifically, Ms. Lewinsky was
nervous about involving the President's Chief of Staff:

Ms. Lewinsky: Well, see, I don't really think -- I'm
going to tell him that I don't think Erskine should
have anything to do with this. I don't think anybody
who works there should.

Ms. Tripp: I don't see how that's -- how that's a
problem.

Ms. Lewinsky: Because look at what happened with Webb
Hubbell.

Ms. Lewinsky preferred that Vernon Jordan assist her in
her job search:

Ms. Tripp: Well, I don't remember during the Webb
Hubbell thing, was Vernon mentioned?

Ms. Lewinsky: Yeah, but there's a big difference. I
think somebody could construe, okay? Somebody could
construe or say, "Well, they gave her a job to shut her
up. They made her happy. . . . And he [Mr. Bowles]
works for the government and shouldn't have done that."
And with the other one [Mr. Jordan] you can't say that.

C. October 16-17: The "Wish List"

On October 16, Ms. Lewinsky sent the President a
packet, which included what she called a "wish list"
describing the types of jobs that interested her in New
York City. The note began: My dream had been to work in
Communications or Strategic Planning at the White
House.  I am open to any suggestions that you may have
on work that is similar to that or may intrigue me. The
most important things to me are that I am engaged and
interested in my work, I am not someone's
administrative/ executive assistant, and my salary can
provide me a comfortable living in NY.

She identified five public relations firms where she
would like to work. Ms. Lewinsky concluded by saying of
the United Nations:

I do not have any interest in working there. As a
result of what happened in April '96, I have already
spent a year and a half at an agency in which I have no
interest. I want a job where I feel challenged,
engaged, and interested. I don't think the UN is the
right place for me.

In a recorded conversation, Ms. Lewinsky said she
wanted the President to take her list seriously and not
ask her to settle for a U.N. job. She said she hoped
"that if he starts to pick a bone with me and the U.N.,
he sure as hell doesn't do it on the phone. . . . I
don't want to start getting into a screaming match with
him on the phone."

In addition to the "wish list," Ms. Lewinsky said she
enclosed in the packet a pair of sunglasses and "a lot
of things in a little envelope," including some jokes,
a card, and a postcard. She said that she had written
on the card: "Wasn't I right that my hugs are better in
person than in cards?" The postcard featured a "very
erotic" Egon Schiele painting. Ms. Lewinsky also
enclosed a note with her thoughts on education reform.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she felt that the President
owed her a job for several reasons: Her relationship
with him was the reason she had been transferred out of
the White House; he had promised her a job and so far
had done nothing to help her find one; and she had left
the White House "quietly," without making an issue of
her relationship with the President.

D. The President Creates Options

At some point around this time in the fall of 1997,
Ms. Currie asked John Podesta, the Deputy Chief of
Staff, to help Ms. Lewinsky find a job in New York.
Mr. Podesta testified that, during a Presidential trip
to Latin America, he approached then-U.N. Ambassador
William Richardson while aboard Air Force One and asked
the Ambassador to consider a former White House intern
for a position at the U.N. At the time, Mr. Podesta
could not recall the intern's name. Ambassador
Richardson and the President both testified that they
never discussed Ms. Lewinsky with each other.

Ambassador Richardson returned from Latin America on
Sunday, October 19. Within a few days, his Executive
Assistant, Isabelle Watkins, called Mr.  Podesta's
secretary and asked whether "she knew anything about a
resume that John was going to send us." Mr.  Podesta's
secretary knew nothing about it and asked Mr.  Podesta
what to do; he instructed her to call Ms. Currie. At
3:09 p.m. on October 21, Ms. Currie faxed
Ms. Lewinsky's resume to the United Nations.

At 7:01 p.m., a six-minute call was placed to Ms.
Lewinsky's apartment from a U.N. telephone number
identified in State Department records as "Ambassador
Richardson's line." Ms. Lewinsky testified that she
spoke to Ambassador Richardson. A woman called, Ms.
Lewinsky testified, and said, "[H]old for Ambassador
Richardson." Then the Ambassador himself came on the
line: "I remember, because I was shocked and I was .
. . very nervous." The purpose of the call was to
schedule a job interview at a Watergate apartment the
following week. At odds with Ms. Lewinsky, the
Ambassador and Ms. Watkins both testified that Ms.
Watkins, not the Ambassador, spoke with Ms.  Lewinsky.

A few days later, according to Ms. Lewinsky, the
President called her. She had been upset because no one
at the White House had prepared her for the
Ambassador's recent call and because she did not want
the White House to railroad her into taking the
U.N. job. She reiterated that she was eager to pursue
other opportunities, especially in the private sector.
The President reassured her, promising that a U.N.
position was just one of many options.

Ms. Lewinsky spoke to the President again one week
later. Ms. Lewinsky testified that she told Ms. Currie
to ask the President to call her to assuage her
nervousness before the U.N. interview.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, on October 30, the night
before the interview, the President did call. She
characterized the conversation as a "pep talk": "[H]e
was trying to kind of build my confidence and reassure
me." The President told her to call Ms. Currie after
the interview. In his Jones deposition, the President
indicated that he learned of her interview with
Ambassador Richardson not from Ms. Lewinsky herself but
from Ms. Currie.

E. The U.N. Interview and Job Offer

On Friday morning, October 31, Ambassador Richardson
and two of his assistants, Mona Sutphen and Rebecca
Cooper, interviewed Ms. Lewinsky at the Watergate.
According to Ambassador Richardson, he "listen[ed]
while Mona and Rebecca were interviewing her." Neither
Ambassador Richardson nor any of his staff made
inquiries, before or after the interview, about Ms.
Lewinsky's prior work performance.

On Sunday, November 2, Ms. Lewinsky drafted a letter to
Ms. Currie asking what to do in the event she received
an offer from the U.N. She wrote:

I became a bit nervous this weekend when I realized
that Amb. Richardson said his staff would be in touch
with me this week. As you know, the UN is supposed to
be my back-up, but because VJ [Vernon Jordan] has been
out of town, this is my only option right now. What
should I say to Richardson's people this week when they
call?

Ms. Lewinsky asked Ms. Currie to speak to the President
about her problem: "If you feel it's appropriate, maybe
you could ask 'the big guy' what he wants me to do.
Ahhhhh . . . anxiety!!!!!" Ms. Lewinsky also mentioned
the President's promise to involve Vernon Jordan in her
job search:

I don't think I told you that in my conversation last
Thursday night with him that he said that he would ask
you to set up a meeting between VJ and myself, once VJ
got back. I assume he'll mention this to you at some
point -- hopefully sooner rather than later!

Before Ms. Lewinsky sent this letter, in her
recollection, she received an offer from the U.N.
Phone records reflect that, at 11:02 a.m. on November
3, a three-minute call was placed to Ms. Lewinsky from
the U.N. line identified in State Department records as
Ambassador Richardson's. Ms. Lewinsky stated that she
believes she spoke to Ambassador Richardson, who
extended her a job offer.

According to his assistant, Ambassador Richardson made
the decision to hire Ms. Lewinsky. Ms. Sutphen
testified:

I said, are you sure; and he said, yeah, yeah, I'm
sure, why. And I said . . . are you sure, though you
don't want to talk to anyone else . . . . And he said,
no, no, I think it's fine; why don't you go ahead and
give her an offer?

Ambassador Richardson and Ms. Sutphen both testified
that Ms. Sutphen, not the Ambassador, extended the job
offer to Ms. Lewinsky. They recalled that the offer was
made a week or 10 days after the interview, though Ms.
Sutphen, when shown the phone records, testified that
the November 3 call to Ms. Lewinsky probably was the
job offer.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she told Ms. Currie about
the offer and she probably also told the President
directly. Ms. Currie first testified that she had
"probably" told the President about Ms. Lewinsky's U.N.
offer, then testified that she had in fact told him,
then testified that she could not remember, though she
acknowledged that the President was interested in
Ms. Lewinsky's getting a job.

When the President was asked in the Jones deposition
whether he knew that Ms. Lewinsky had received the
offer of a job at the U.N., he testified: "I know that
she interviewed for one. I don't know if she was
offered one or not."

F. The U.N. Job Offer Declined

Three weeks after she received an offer, on November
24, Ms. Lewinsky called Ms. Sutphen and asked for more
time to consider the offer because she wanted to pursue
possibilities in the private sector. Ms. Sutphen told
Ambassador Richardson, who, according to Ms.  Sutphen,
said the delay would be fine. Over a month later, on
January 5, 1998, Ms. Lewinsky finally turned down the
job.

         X. November 1997: Growing Frustration

Ms. Lewinsky met with Vernon Jordan, who promised to
help her find a job in New York. November proved,
however, to be a month of inactivity with respect to
both Ms. Lewinsky's job search and her relationship
with the President. Mr. Jordan did not meet with
Ms. Lewinsky again, nor did he contact anyone in New
York City on her behalf. Ms. Lewinsky became
increasingly anxious about her inability to see the
President. Except for a momentary encounter in
mid-November, Ms. Lewinsky did not meet with the
President between October 11 and December 5.

A. Interrogatories Answered

On November 3, 1997, the President answered Paula
Jones's Second Set of Interrogatories. Two of those
interrogatories asked the President to list any woman
other than his wife with whom he had "had," "proposed
having," or "sought to have" sexual relations during
the time that he was Attorney General of Arkansas,
Governor of Arkansas, and President of the United
States.  President Clinton objected to the scope and
relevance of both interrogatories and refused to answer
them.

B. First Vernon Jordan Meeting

In mid-October, the President had agreed to involve
Vernon Jordan in Ms. Lewinsky's job search. In a draft
letter to Ms. Currie dated November 2, Ms.  Lewinsky
wrote that the President had "said he would ask you to
set up a meeting between VJ and myself."  According to
Ms. Lewinsky, on November 3 or November 4, Ms. Currie
told her to call Vernon Jordan's secretary to arrange a
meeting. Ms. Currie said she had spoken with Mr. Jordan
and he was expecting Ms. Lewinsky's call. In
Ms. Lewinsky's account, Ms. Currie sought Mr. Jordan's
aid at the President's direction. Mr.  Jordan likewise
testified that, in his understanding, the President was
behind Ms. Currie's request.

Ms. Currie testified at various points that she
contacted Mr. Jordan on her own initiative; that the
President "probably" talked with her about Ms.
Lewinsky's New York job hunt; and that she could not
recall whether the President was involved. In his Jones
deposition, the President was asked whether he did
anything to facilitate a meeting between Mr. Jordan and
Ms. Lewinsky. He testified:

I can tell you what my memory is. My memory is that
Vernon said something to me about her coming in, Betty
had called and asked if he [Mr. Jordan] would see her
[Ms. Lewinsky]. . . . I'm sure if he said something to
me about it I said something positive about it. I
wouldn't have said anything negative about it.

When pressed, the President testified that he did not
think that he was the "precipitating force" in
arranging the meeting between Mr. Jordan and
Ms. Lewinsky.

At 8:50 a.m. on November 5, Mr. Jordan spoke with the
President by telephone for five minutes. Later that
morning, Mr. Jordan and Ms. Lewinsky met in his office
for about twenty minutes. She told him that she
intended to move to New York, and she named several
companies where she hoped to work. She showed him the
"wish list" that she had sent the President on October
16. Mr. Jordan said that he had spoken with the
President about her and that she came "highly
recommended." Concerning her job search, Mr. Jordan
said: "We're in business."

In the course of the day, Mr. Jordan placed four calls
to Ms. Hernreich (whom he acknowledged calling when he
wished to speak to the President) and one to Ms.
Currie. Mr. Jordan testified that he could not remember
the calls, but "[i]t is entirely possible" that they
concerned Monica Lewinsky.

Mr. Jordan also visited the White House and met with
the President at 2:00 p.m. that day. Again, Mr. Jordan
testified that he had "no recollection" of the
substance of his conversation with the President.

On November 6, the day after meeting with Mr. Jordan,
Ms. Lewinsky wrote him a thank-you letter: "It made me
happy to know that our friend has such a wonderful
confidant in you." Also on November 6, Ms. Lewinsky
wrote in an email to a friend that she expected to hear
from Mr. Jordan "later next week." The evidence
indicates, though, that Mr. Jordan took no steps to
help Ms. Lewinsky until early December, after she
appeared on the witness list in the Jones case.

Mr. Jordan initially testified that he had "no
recollection of having met with Ms. Lewinsky on
November 5." When shown documentary evidence
demonstrating that his first meeting with Ms. Lewinsky
occurred in early November, he acknowledged that an
early November meeting was "entirely possible."
Mr. Jordan's failure to remember his November meeting
with Ms.  Lewinsky may indicate the low priority he
attached to it at the time.

C. November 13: The Zedillo Visit

On Thursday, November 13, while Ernesto Zedillo, the
President of Mexico, was in the White House, Ms.
Lewinsky met very briefly with President Clinton in the
private study. Ms. Lewinsky's visit, which she
described in an email as a "hysterical escapade," was
the culmination of days of phone calls and notes to Ms.
Currie and the President.

Over the course of the week that preceded November 13,
Ms. Lewinsky made several attempts to arrange a visit
with the President. On Monday, November 10, in addition
to making frequent calls to Ms. Currie, she sent the
President a note asking for a meeting.

She hoped to see him on Tuesday, November 11 (Veterans
Day), but he did not respond. By courier, she sent the
President another note:

I asked you three weeks ago to please be sensitive to
what I am going through right now and to keep in
contact with me, and yet I'm still left writing notes
in vain. I am not a moron. I know that what is going on
in the world takes precedence, but I don't think what I
have asked you for is unreasonable.

She added: "This is so hard for me. I am trying to deal
with so much emotionally, and I have nobody to talk to
about it. I need you right now not as president, but as
a man. PLEASE be my friend."

That evening, November 12, according to Ms. Lewinsky,
the President called and invited her to the White House
the following day. In an email to a friend, Ms.
Lewinsky wrote that she and the President "talked for
almost an hour." She added: "[H]e thought [N]ancy
[Hernreich] (one of the meanies) would be out for a few
hours on Thursday and I could come see him then."

The following morning, November 13, Ms. Lewinsky tried
to arrange a visit with the President. She called
repeatedly but suspected that Ms. Currie was not
telling the President of her calls. Around noon,
Ms. Currie told Ms. Lewinsky that the President had
left to play golf. Ms. Lewinsky, in her own words,
"went ballistic."

After the President returned from the Army-Navy Golf
Course in the late afternoon, Ms. Lewinsky told Ms.
Currie that she was coming to the White House to give
him some gifts. Ms. Currie suggested that Ms.  Lewinsky
wait in Ms. Currie's car in the White House parking
lot. Ms. Lewinsky went to the White House only to find
that the doors to Ms. Currie's car were locked.
Ms. Lewinsky waited in the rain.

Ms. Currie eventually met her in the parking lot, and,
in Ms. Lewinsky's words, they made a "bee-line" into
the White House, sneaking up the back stairs to avoid
other White House employees, particularly Presidential
aide Stephen Goodin. Ms. Lewinsky left two small gifts
for the President with Ms. Currie, then waited alone
for about half an hour in the Oval Office study. In the
study, Ms. Lewinsky saw several gifts she had given the
President, including Oy Vey! The Things They Say: A
Guide to Jewish Wit, Nicholson Baker's novel Vox, and a
letter opener decorated with a frog.

The President finally joined Ms. Lewinsky in the study,
where they were alone for only a minute or two. Ms.
Lewinsky gave him an antique paperweight in the shape
of the White House. She also showed him an email
describing the effect of chewing Altoid mints before
performing oral sex. Ms. Lewinsky was chewing Altoids
at the time, but the President replied that he did not
have enough time for oral sex. They kissed, and the
President rushed off for a State Dinner with President
Zedillo.

D. November 14-December 4: Inability to See the
President

After this brief November 13 meeting, Ms. Lewinsky did
not see the President again until the first week in
December. Hoping to arrange a longer rendezvous, she
sent the President several notes, as well as a cassette
on which she recorded a message.

Along with her chagrin over not seeing the President,
Ms. Lewinsky was frustrated that her job search had
apparently stalled. A few days before Thanksgiving, she
complained to Ms. Currie that she had not heard from
Mr.  Jordan. Ms. Currie arranged for her to speak with
him "before Thanksgiving," while Ms. Lewinsky was in
Los Angeles. Mr. Jordan told her to call him the
following week to arrange another meeting.

In draft letters to the President, which were recovered
from her Pentagon computer, Ms. Lewinsky reflected on
the change in their relationship: "[B]oth
professionally and personally, . . . our personal
relationship changing has caused me more pain. Do you
realize that?" She asked for the President's
understanding: "I don't want you to think that I am not
grateful for what you are doing for me now -- I'd
probably be in a mental institute without it -- but I
am consumed with this disappointment, frustration, and
anger." Ms. Lewinsky rued the brevity of her November
13 visit with the President: "All you . . . . ever have
to do to pacify me is see me and hold me," she
wrote. "Maybe that's asking too much."

               XI. December 5-18, 1997:

            The Witness List and Job Search

On Friday, December 5, Paula Jones's attorneys faxed a
list of their potential witnesses -- including Ms.
Lewinsky -- to the President's personal attorneys. The
following day, President Clinton saw Ms. Lewinsky in an
unscheduled visit and then discussed the Jones case
with his attorneys and Deputy White House Counsel Bruce
Lindsey. A few days later, Ms. Lewinsky met with Mr.
Jordan at his office, and he arranged interviews for
Ms.  Lewinsky at three companies. In the middle of the
night on December 17, the President called and informed
Ms.  Lewinsky that she was on the witness list and that
she might have to testify under oath in the Jones case.

A. December 5: The Witness List

On Friday December 5, 1997, attorneys for Paula Jones
identified Ms. Lewinsky as a potential witness in Ms.
Jones's sexual harassment case. At 5:40 p.m., they
faxed their witness list to the President's attorney,
Robert Bennett. Ms. Lewinsky, however, would not learn
of her potential involvement in the Jones case for
twelve more days, when the President informed her.

President Clinton was asked in the grand jury when he
learned that Ms. Lewinsky's name was on the witness
list. The President responded: "I believe that I found
out late in the afternoon on the sixth."

B. December 5: Christmas Party at the White House

On Friday, December 5, Ms. Lewinsky returned from
Department of Defense travel in Europe. She asked
Ms. Currie if the President could see her the next day,
but Ms. Currie said he was busy meeting with his
lawyers. In the late afternoon, she attended a
Christmas party at the White House with a Defense
Department colleague. Ms. Lewinsky exchanged a few
words with the President in the reception line.

The Christmas reception encounter heightened Ms.
Lewinsky's frustration. On the evening of December 5,
she drafted an anguished letter to the President.
"[Y]ou want me out of your life," she wrote. "I guess
the signs have been made clear for awhile -- not
wanting to see me and rarely calling. I used to think
it was you putting up walls." She had purchased several
gifts for him, and, she wrote, "I wanted to give them
to you in person, but that is obviously not going to
happen." Ms. Lewinsky reminded the President of his
words during their October 10 telephone argument:

I will never forget what you said that night we fought
on the phone -- if you had known what I was really like
you would never have gotten involved with me. I'm sure
you're not the first person to have felt that way about
me. I am sorry that this has been such a bad
experience.

She concluded the letter: "I knew it would hurt to say
goodbye to you; I just never thought it would have to
be on paper. Take care."

C. December 6: The Northwest Gate Incident

1. Initial Visit and Rejection

On the morning of Saturday, December 6, Ms. Lewinsky
went to the White House to deliver the letter and gifts
to the President. The gifts included a sterling silver
antique cigar holder, a tie, a mug, a "Hugs and Kisses"
box, and an antique book about Theodore Roosevelt.
Ms. Lewinsky planned to leave the parcel with Ms.
Currie, who had told Ms. Lewinsky that the President
would be busy with his lawyers and unable to see her.

Ms. Lewinsky arrived at the White House at
approximately 10:00 a.m. She told the Secret Service
uniformed officers at the Northwest Gate that she had
gifts to drop off for the President, but that
Ms. Currie did not know she was coming. Ms. Lewinsky
and the officers made several calls in an attempt to
locate Ms.  Currie. The officers eventually invited Ms.
Lewinsky inside the guard booth. When Ms. Currie
learned that Ms. Lewinsky was at the Northwest Gate,
she sent word that the President "already had a guest
in the [O]val," so the officers should have
Ms. Lewinsky wait there for about 40 minutes.

While Ms. Lewinsky was waiting, one officer mentioned
that Eleanor Mondale was in the White House. Ms.
Lewinsky correctly surmised that the President was
meeting with Ms. Mondale, rather than his lawyers, and
she was "livid." She stormed away, called and berated
Ms. Currie from a pay phone, and then returned to her
Watergate apartment.

Hands shaking and almost crying, Ms. Currie informed
several Secret Service officers that the President was
"irate" that someone had disclosed to Ms. Lewinsky whom
he was meeting with. Ms. Currie told Sergeant Keith
Williams, a supervisory uniformed Secret Service
Officer, that if he "didn't find out what was going on,
someone could be fired." She also told Captain Jeffrey
Purdie, the Secret Service watch commander for the
uniformed division at the time, that the President was
"so upset he wants somebody fired over this."

2. Ms. Lewinsky Returns to the White House

From her apartment, Ms. Lewinsky reached the President
on the phone. According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President
was angry that she had "made a stink" and said that "it
was none of my business . . . what he was doing."

Then, to Ms. Lewinsky's surprise, the President invited
her to visit him. She testified that "none of the other
times that we had really fought on the phone did it end
up resulting in a visit that day." WAVES records
reflect that Ms. Lewinsky was cleared to enter the
White House at 12:52 p.m. and exited at 1:36 p.m.

During their meeting, Ms. Lewinsky told the President
that Mr. Jordan had done nothing to help her find a
job. The President responded, "Oh, I'll talk to
him. I'll get on it."

Ms. Lewinsky testified that, overall, she had a "really
nice" and "affectionate" visit with the President.  In
an email to a friend a few days later, she wrote that,
although "things have been crazy with the creep, .
. . I did have a wonderful visit with him on Saturday.
When he doesn't put his walls up, it is always
heavenly."

3. "Whatever Just Happened Didn't Happen"

Later that day (December 6), the uniformed Secret
Service officers at the Northwest Gate were told that
no one would be fired -- so long as they remained
quiet.  According to Sergeant Williams, Ms. Currie said
that, if the officers did not "tell a lot of people
what had happened, then nothing would happen."

The President told Captain Jeffrey Purdie, the Secret
Service watch commander for the uniformed division at
the time, "I hope you use your discretion." Captain
Purdie interpreted the President's remark to mean that
Captain Purdie "wasn't going to say anything," and he
in turn told all of the officers involved not to
discuss the incident. One officer recalled that Captain
Purdie told him and other officers, "Whatever just
happened didn't happen." Captain Purdie told another
officer, "I was just in the Oval Office with the
President and he wants somebody's ass out
here. . . . As far as you're concerned, . . . [t]his
never happened." In response, that officer, who
considered the Northwest Gate incident a "major event,"
"just shook [his] head" and "started making a set of
[his] own notes" in order to document the incident.

Captain Purdie recommended to his supervisor, Deputy
Chief Charles O'Malley, that "no paperwork be
generated" regarding the Northwest Gate incident
because "Ms.  Currie was satisfied with the way things
were handled." According to Captain Purdie, Deputy
Chief O'Malley agreed, and no record of the incident
was made. Deputy Chief O'Malley testified that the
meeting between the President and Captain Purdie was
the only occasion he could recall in fourteen years at
the White House where a President directly addressed a
job performance issue with a uniformed division
supervisor.

The President was questioned in the grand jury about
the incident at the Northwest Gate. He testified that
he knew that Ms. Lewinsky had become upset upon
learning that Ms. Mondale was in the White House "to
see us that day." He testified: "As I remember, I had
some other work to do that morning. . . . " The
President said that the disclosure of information that
day was "inappropriate" and "a mistake," but he could
not recall whether he wanted a Secret Service officer
fired or gave any such orders. He thought that the
officers "were . . . told not to let it happen again,
and I think that's the way it should have been
handled." When asked if he told Captain Purdie that he
hoped that he could count on his discretion, the
President stated, "I don't remember anything I said to
him in that regard."

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President later
indicated to her that he had concerns about the
discretion of the Secret Service uniformed officers. On
December 28 she asked how Paula Jones's attorneys could
have known enough to place her on the witness list. The
President replied that the source might be Linda Tripp
or "the uniformed officers."

D. The President Confers with His Lawyers

Deputy Counsel Bruce Lindsey testified that he met with
the President and the President's personal attorney,
Robert Bennett, at around 5:00 p.m. on December 6 to
discuss the Jones case. According to Mr. Lindsey, it
was "likely" that he learned about Ms. Lewinsky's
appearance on the witness list in that meeting.

Earlier in the day, at around 12:00 p.m. (after Ms.
Lewinsky stormed away from the Northwest Gate but
before she returned and saw the President), Mr. Lindsey
had received a page: "Call Betty ASAP." Mr. Lindsey
testified that he did not recall the page, nor did he
know, at the time, that Ms. Lewinsky had visited the
White House.

E. Second Jordan Meeting

The next day (Sunday, December 7), Mr. Jordan visited
the White House and met with the President. Mr.  Jordan
testified that he was "fairly certain" that he did not
discuss the Jones suit or Ms. Lewinsky.

On Thursday, December 11, Ms. Lewinsky had her second
meeting with Mr. Jordan. Ms. Lewinsky testified that
they discussed her job search, and Mr. Jordan told her
to send letters to three business contacts that he
provided her. Mr. Jordan noted that Ms. Lewinsky was
anxious to get a job as quickly as possible, and he
took action. In the course of the day, Mr. Jordan
placed calls on her behalf to Peter Georgescu, Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer at Young & Rubicam; Richard
Halperin, Executive Vice President and Special Counsel
to the Chairman of MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings, Inc.
(majority stockholder of Revlon); and Ursula Fairbairn,
Executive Vice-President, Human Resources and Quality,
of American Express. Mr. Jordan told Ms. Lewinsky to
keep him informed of the progress of her job search.

At one point in the conversation, according to Ms.
Lewinsky, Mr. Jordan said, "[Y]ou're a friend of the
President." This prompted Ms. Lewinsky to reveal that
she "didn't really look at him as the President";
rather, she "reacted to him more as a man and got angry
at him like a man and just a regular person." When
Mr. Jordan asked why Ms. Lewinsky got angry at the
President, she replied that she became upset "when he
doesn't call me enough or see me enough." Ms.  Lewinsky
testified that Mr. Jordan advised her to take her
frustrations out on him rather than the
President. According to Ms. Lewinsky, Mr. Jordan summed
up the situation: "You're in love, that's what your
problem is."

Mr. Jordan recalled a similar conversation, in which
Ms.  Lewinsky complained that the President did not see
her enough, although he thought it took place during a
meeting eight days later. He testified that he felt the
need to remind Ms. Lewinsky that the President is the
"leader of the free world" and has competing
obligations.

Mr. Jordan is "certain" that he had a conversation with
the President about Ms. Lewinsky at some point after
this December 11 meeting. He told the President that he
would be trying to get Ms. Lewinsky a job in New
York. Mr. Jordan testified that the President "was
aware that people were trying to get jobs for her, that
Podesta was trying to help her, that Bill Richardson
was trying to help her, but that she really wanted to
work in the private sector."

F. Early Morning Phone Call

On December 15, 1997, Paula Jones's lawyers served
President Clinton with her second set of document
requests by overnight mail. These requests asked the
President to "produce documents that related to
communications between the President and Monica
Lewisky" [sic]. This was the first Paula Jones
discovery request to refer to Monica Lewinsky by name.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that in the early-morning hours
of December 17, at roughly 2:00 or 2:30 a.m., she
received a call from the President. The call lasted
about half an hour.

The President gave Ms. Lewinsky two items of news: Ms.
Currie's brother had died in a car accident, and Ms.
Lewinsky's name had appeared on the witness list in the
Jones case. According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President
said "it broke his heart" to see her name on the
witness list. The President told her that she would not
necessarily be subpoenaed; if she were, he "suggested
she could sign an affidavit to try to satisfy
[Ms. Jones's] inquiry and not be deposed."

The President told Ms. Lewinsky to contact Ms. Currie
in the event she were subpoenaed. He also reviewed one
of their established cover stories. He told
Ms. Lewinsky that she "should say she visited the
[White House] to see Ms. Currie and, on occasion when
working at the [White House], she brought him letters
when no one else was around." The President's advice
"was . . .  instantly familiar to [Ms. Lewinsky]." She
testified that the President's use of this "misleading"
story amounted to a continuation of their pre-existing
pattern.

Later in the conversation, according to Ms. Lewinsky,
the President said he would try to get Ms. Currie to
come in over the weekend so that Ms. Lewinsky could
visit and he could give her several Christmas
presents. Ms. Lewinsky replied that, since Ms.
Currie's brother had just died, perhaps they should
"let Betty be."

In his grand jury appearance, the President was
questioned about the December 17 phone call. He
testified that, although he could not rule it out, he
did not remember such a call. The President was also
asked whether in this conversation, or a conversation
before Ms. Lewinsky's name came up in the Jones case,
he instructed her to say that she was coming to bring
letters. The President answered: "I might well have
said that."

But when asked whether he ever said anything along
these lines after Ms. Lewinsky had been identified on
the witness list, the President answered: "I don't
recall whether I might have done something like that."
He speculated that he might have suggested this
explanation in the context of a call from a reporter.
Nonetheless, he testified, in the context of the Jones
case, "I never asked her to lie."

G. Job Interviews

On December 18, Ms. Lewinsky had two job interviews in
New York City. At MacAndrews & Forbes, she met with
Executive Vice President and Special Counsel to the
Chairman Richard Halperin, who viewed the interview as
"an accommodation for Vernon Jordan." At
Burson-Marstellar, she interviewed with Celia Berk,
Managing Director of Human Resources. A few days later,
on December 23, Ms. Lewinsky interviewed in Washington,
D.C., with Thomas Schick, Executive Vice President,
Corporate Affairs and Communications, of American
Express.

       XII. December 19, 1997 - January 4, 1998:

                     The Subpoena

Ms. Lewinsky was served with a subpoena in the Jones
case on Friday, December 19. She immediately called Mr.
Jordan, and he invited her to his office. Mr. Jordan
spoke with the President that afternoon and again that
evening. He told the President that he had met with Ms.
Lewinsky, that she had been subpoenaed, and that he
planned to obtain an attorney for her. On Sunday,
December 28, the President met with Ms. Lewinsky, who
expressed concern about the subpoena's demand for the
gifts he had given her. Later that day, Ms. Currie
drove to Ms. Lewinsky's apartment and collected a box
containing some of the subpoenaed gifts. Ms. Currie
took the box home and hid it under her bed.

A. December 19: Ms. Lewinsky Is Subpoenaed

On Friday, December 19, 1997, sometime between 3:00
p.m.  and 4:00 p.m., Ms. Lewinsky was served with a
subpoena at her Pentagon office. The subpoena commanded
her to appear for a deposition in Washington, D.C., at
9:30 a.m. on January 23, 1998. The subpoena also
required the production of certain documents and gifts.
Among the items that Ms. Lewinsky was required to
produce were "each and every gift including, but not
limited to, any and all dresses, accessories, and
jewelry, and/or hat pins given to you by, or on behalf
of, Defendant Clinton," as well as "[e]very document
constituting or containing communications between you
and Defendant Clinton, including letters, cards, notes,
memoranda, and all telephone records."

Ms. Lewinsky testified that, after being served with
the subpoena, she "burst into tears," and then
telephoned Mr. Jordan from a pay phone at the
Pentagon. Mr.  Jordan confirmed Ms. Lewinsky's account;
he said he tried to reassure Ms. Lewinsky: "[C]ome and
talk to me and I will see what I can do about finding
you counsel."

According to records maintained by Mr. Jordan's law
firm, Ms. Lewinsky arrived at his office at 4:47
p.m. White House phone records show that, at 4:57 p.m.,
the President telephoned Mr. Jordan; the two men spoke
from 5:01 p.m. to 5:05 p.m. At 5:06 p.m., Mr.  Jordan
placed a two-minute call to a Washington, D.C.,
attorney named Francis Carter.

Ms. Lewinsky and Mr. Jordan gave somewhat different
accounts of their meeting that day. According to Ms.
Lewinsky, shortly after her arrival, Mr. Jordan
received a phone call, and she stepped out of his
office. A few minutes later, Ms. Lewinsky was invited
back in, and Mr.  Jordan called Mr. Carter.

Mr. Jordan testified that he spoke to the President
before Ms. Lewinsky ever entered his office. He told
the President: "Monica Lewinsky called me up. She's
upset. She's gotten a subpoena. She is coming to see me
about this subpoena. I'm confident that she needs a
lawyer, and I will try to get her a lawyer." Mr.
Jordan told the President that the lawyer he had in
mind was Francis Carter. According to Mr. Jordan, the
President asked him: "You think he's a good lawyer?"
Mr.  Jordan responded that he was. Mr. Jordan testified
that informing the President of Ms. Lewinsky's subpoena
"was the purpose of [his] call."

According to Mr. Jordan, when Ms. Lewinsky entered his
office, "[H]er emotional state was obviously one of
dishevelment and she was quite upset. She was crying.
She was -- she was highly emotional, to say the least."
She showed him the subpoena as soon as she entered.

Ms. Lewinsky also testified that she discussed the
subpoena with Mr. Jordan. She told him that she found
the specific reference to a hat pin alarming -- how
could the Jones's attorneys have known about it?
Mr. Jordan told her it was "a standard subpoena." When
he indicated to Ms. Lewinsky that he would be seeing
the President that night, Ms.  Lewinsky told him "to
please make sure that he told the President" about her
subpoena.

At some point, according to Mr. Jordan, Ms. Lewinsky
asked him about the future of the Clintons'
marriage. Because Ms. Lewinsky seemed "mesmerized" by
President Clinton, he "asked her directly had there
been any sexual relationship between [her] and the
President." Mr. Jordan explained, "You didn't have to
be Einstein to know that that was a question that had
to be asked by me at that particular time, because
heretofore this discussion was about a job. The
subpoena changed the circumstances." Ms. Lewinsky said
she had not had a sexual relationship with the
President.

Ms. Lewinsky testified, however, that at this time she
assumed that Mr. Jordan knew "with a wink and a nod
that [she] was having a relationship with the
President." She therefore interpreted Mr. Jordan's
questions as "What are you going to say?" rather than
"What are the [actual] answers . . .?" When the meeting
ended, she "asked [Mr. Jordan] if he would give the
President a hug."

That evening, Mr. Jordan visited the President at the
White House. According to Mr. Jordan, the two met alone
in the Residence and talked for about ten minutes.  He
testified:

I told him that Monica Lewinsky had been subpoenaed,
came to me with a subpoena. I told him that I was
concerned by her fascination, her being taken with him.
I told him how emotional she was about having gotten
the subpoena. I told him what she said to me about
whether or not he was going to leave the First Lady at
the end of the term.

Mr. Jordan asked the President "[t]he one question that
I wanted answered." That question was, "Mr.  President,
have you had sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky?"
The President told Mr. Jordan, "No, never."

Mr. Jordan told the President: "I'm trying to help her
get a job and I'm going to continue to do that. I'm
going to get her counsel and I'm going to try to be
helpful to her as much as I possibly can, both with the
lawyer, and I've already done what I could about the
job, and I think you ought to know that." Mr.  Jordan
testified: "He thanked me for telling him.  Thanked me
for my efforts to get her a job and thanked me for
getting her a lawyer."

In his grand jury testimony, the President recalled
that he met with Mr. Jordan on December 19; however, he
testified that his memory of that meeting was somewhat
vague:

I do not remember exactly what the nature of the
conversation was. I do remember that I told him that
there was no sexual relationship between me and Monica
Lewinsky, which was true. And that -- then all I
remember for the rest is that he said he had referred
her to a lawyer, and I believe it was Mr. Carter.

Asked whether he recalled that Mr. Jordan told him that
Ms. Lewinsky appeared fixated on him and hoped that he
would leave Mrs. Clinton, the President testified: "I
recall him saying he thought that she was upset with --
somewhat fixated on me, that she acknowledged that she
was not having a sexual relationship with me, and that
she did not want to be [brought] into that Jones
lawsuit."

B. December 22: Meeting with Vernon Jordan

Mr. Jordan arranged for Ms. Lewinsky to meet with
attorney Francis Carter at 11:00 a.m. on Monday,
December 22. On that morning, according to Ms.
Lewinsky, she called Mr. Jordan and asked to meet
before they went to Mr. Carter's office. She testified:
"I was a little concerned. I thought maybe [Mr. Jordan]
didn't really understand . . . what it was that was
happening here with me being subpoenaed and what this
really meant." She also wanted to find out whether he
had in fact told the President of her subpoena. Mr.
Jordan said that he had. Ms. Lewinsky also told Mr.
Jordan that she was worried that someone might have
been eavesdropping on her telephone conversations with
the President. When Mr. Jordan asked why she thought
that would be of concern, Ms. Lewinsky said, "Well,
we've had phone sex."

Ms. Lewinsky testified that she brought some of her
gifts from the President, showed them to Mr. Jordan,
and implied that these items were not all of the gifts
that the President had given her. Mr. Jordan, in
contrast, testified that Ms. Lewinsky never showed him
any gifts from the President.

C. December 22: First Meeting with Francis Carter

Mr. Jordan drove Ms. Lewinsky to Mr. Carter's
office. There, he introduced Ms. Lewinsky to Mr.
Carter, explaining that she needed not only a lawyer
but a "counselor." Mr. Carter testified that, after the
initial referral, he expected to have no further
contact with Mr. Jordan about Ms. Lewinsky or her case.

Mr. Carter and Ms. Lewinsky then met for approximately
an hour. She explained that she did not want to be
drawn into the Jones case and would strongly prefer not
to be deposed. He said that he would try to persuade
Paula Jones's attorneys not to depose her.
Ms. Lewinsky testified that she suggested filing an
affidavit to avert a deposition.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she asked Mr. Carter to get
in touch with the President's personal attorney, Robert
Bennett, just "to let him know that I had been
subpoenaed in this case." She wanted to make clear that
she was "align[ing] [her]self with the President's
side." Mr. Carter testified that, while Ms.  Lewinsky
was in his office, he placed a call to Mr.  Bennett to
arrange a meeting.

On the morning of Tuesday, December 23, Mr. Carter met
for an hour with two of the President's personal
attorneys, Mr. Bennett and Katherine Sexton. The
President's attorneys told Mr. Carter that other
witnesses had filed motions to quash their subpoenas,
and they offered legal research to support such a
motion.

D. December 23: Clinton Denials to Paula Jones

Throughout the sexual harassment case, Ms. Jones's
attorneys attempted to obtain information about
President Clinton's sexual relationships with any woman
other than his wife. On December 11, 1997, the judge
overseeing the Jones case, Susan Webber Wright, ruled
that the President had to answer a written
interrogatory naming every state and federal employee
since 1986 with whom he had sexual relations or with
whom he had proposed to have sexual relations. On
December 23, 1997, the President answered the
interrogatory: "None."

E. December 28: Final Meeting with the President

A day or two after Christmas, Ms. Lewinsky called Ms.
Currie and told her that the President had mentioned
that he had presents for her. Ms. Currie called back
and told her to come to the White House at 8:30 a.m. on
Sunday, December 28.

That morning, Ms. Lewinsky met with the President in
the Oval Office. WAVES records reflect that the visit
was requested by Ms. Currie and that Ms. Lewinsky
entered the White House at 8:16 a.m.

After she arrived at the Oval Office, she, the
President, and Ms. Currie played with Buddy, the
President's dog, and chatted. Then, the President took
her to the study and gave her several Christmas
presents: a marble bear's head, a Rockettes blanket, a
Black Dog stuffed animal, a small box of chocolates, a
pair of joke sunglasses, and a pin with a New York
skyline on it.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that, during this visit, she and
the President had a "passionate" and "physically
intimate" kiss.

Ms. Lewinsky and the President also talked about the
Jones case. In Ms. Lewinsky's account, she asked the
President "how he thought [she] got put on the witness
list." He speculated that Linda Tripp or one of the
uniformed Secret Service officers had told the Jones
attorneys about her. When Ms. Lewinsky mentioned her
anxiety about the subpoena's reference to a hat pin, he
said "that sort of bothered [him], too." He asked
whether she had told anyone about the hat pin, and she
assured him that she had not.

At some point in the conversation, Ms. Lewinsky told
the President, "[M]aybe I should put the gifts away
outside my house somewhere or give them to someone,
maybe Betty." Ms. Lewinsky recalled that the President
responded either "I don't know" or "Let me think about
that."

When Ms. Lewinsky was asked whether she thought it odd
for the President to give her gifts under the
circumstances (with a subpoena requiring the production
of all his gifts), she testified that she did not think
of it at the time, but she did note some hesitancy on
the President's part:

[H]e had hesitated very briefly right before I left
that day in kind of packaging . . . all my stuff back
up . .  . I don't think he said anything that indicated
this to me, but I thought to myself, "I wonder if he's
thinking he shouldn't give these to me to take out."
But he did.

When asked in the Jones deposition about his last
meeting with Ms. Lewinsky, the President remembered
only that she stopped by "[p]robably sometime before
Christmas" and he "stuck [his] head out [of the
office], said hello to her." The deposition occurred
three weeks after this December 28 meeting with
Ms. Lewinsky.

In the grand jury, the President acknowledged "talking
with Ms. Lewinsky about her testimony, or about the
prospect that she might have to give testimony. And
she, she talked to me about that." He maintained,
however, that they did not discuss Ms. Lewinsky's
subpoena: "[S]he was upset. She -- well, she -- we --
she didn't -- we didn't talk about a subpoena. But she
was upset." In the President's recollection, Ms.
Lewinsky said she knew nothing about sexual harassment;
why did she have to testify? According to the
President, "I explained to her that it was a political
lawsuit.  They wanted to get whatever they could under
oath that was damaging to me."

Ms. Lewinsky's friend, Catherine Allday Davis,
testified about a conversation with Ms. Lewinsky on
January 3, 1998. Ms. Lewinsky told Ms. Davis that she
had met with the President and discussed the Jones case
a few days earlier. Ms. Davis testified that
Ms. Lewinsky and the President had "noted [that] there
was no evidence" of their relationship.

E. December 28: Concealment of Gifts

In the afternoon of December 28, a few hours after Ms.
Lewinsky's White House visit, Ms. Currie drove to Ms.
Lewinsky's Watergate apartment and collected a box
containing the President's gifts. Ms. Currie then took
the box home and hid it under her bed. Ms. Lewinsky,
Ms.  Currie, and the President were all questioned as
to why Ms. Currie retrieved the box of gifts from
Ms. Lewinsky.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, the transfer originated in a
phone call from Ms. Currie that afternoon. Ms. Lewinsky
testified that Ms. Currie said, "I understand you have
something to give me," or, "The President said you have
something to give me." Ms. Lewinsky understood that
Ms. Currie was alluding to the gifts. Ms. Currie said
that she would stop by Ms. Lewinsky's apartment and
pick up the items. Ms. Lewinsky testified that she put
many, but not all, of her gifts from the President into
a box. Ms. Currie drove by her apartment and picked it
up.

Ms. Lewinsky was concerned because the gifts were under
subpoena; she did not throw them away, however, because
"they meant a lot to [her]." The reason she gave the
gifts to Ms. Currie, and not to one of her friends or
her mother, was "a little bit of an assurance to the
President . . . that everything was okay." She felt
that, because the gifts were with Ms. Currie, they were
within the President's control: "Not that [the gifts]
were going to be in his possession, but that he would
understand whatever it was I gave to Betty and that
that might make him feel a little bit better."

Ms. Lewinsky's account of the events of December 28 in
her sworn statement of February 1, 1998, corroborates
her later grand jury testimony:

"Ms. L . . . asked if she should put away (outside her
home) the gifts he had given her or, maybe, give them
to someone else. Ms. Currie called Ms. L later that
afternoon as said that the Pres. had told her Ms. L.
wanted her to hold onto something for her. Ms. L boxed
up most of the gifts she had received and gave them to
Ms. Currie. It is unknown if Ms. Currie knew the
contents of the box."

Ms. Currie's testimony was somewhat at odds with Ms.
Lewinsky's. Though her overall recollection was hazy,
Ms. Currie believed that Ms. Lewinsky had called her
and raised the idea of the gifts transfer. Ms. Currie
was asked about the President's involvement in the
transfer:

Q: And did the President know you were holding these
things for Monica?

BC: I don't know. I don't know.

Q: Didn't he say to you that Monica had something for
you to hold?

BC: I don't remember that. I don't.

Q: Did you ever talk to the President and tell him you
had this box from Monica?

BC: I don't remember that either.

Q: Do you think it happened, though?

BC: I don't know. I don't know.

When asked whether a statement by Ms. Lewinsky
indicating that Ms. Currie had in fact spoken to the
President about the gift transfer would be false, Ms.
Currie replied: "Then she may remember better than I. I
don't remember."

According to Ms. Currie, Ms. Lewinsky said that she was
uncomfortable retaining the gifts herself because
"people were asking questions" about them. Ms.  Currie
said she drove to Ms. Lewinsky's residence after work,
collected the box, brought it home, and put it under
her bed. Written on the top of the box were the words
"Please do not throw away!!!" Ms. Currie testified that
she knew that the box contained gifts from the
President.

For his part, the President testified that he never
asked Ms. Currie to collect a box of gifts from Ms.
Lewinsky. He said that he had no knowledge that Ms.
Currie had held those items "until that was made
public."

The President testified that he has no distinct
recollection of discussing the gifts with Ms. Lewinsky
on December 28: "[M]y memory is that on some day in
December, and I'm sorry I don't remember when it was,
she said, well, what if they ask me about the gifts you
have given me. And I said, well, if you get a request
to produce those, you have to give them whatever you
have."

D. December 31: Breakfast with Vernon Jordan

Ms. Lewinsky testified that in late December 1997 she
realized that she needed to "come up with some sort of
strategy as to [what to do] if Linda Tripp" divulged
what she knew. On December 30, Ms. Lewinsky telephoned
Mr. Jordan's office and conveyed either directly to him
or through one of his secretaries that she was
concerned about the Jones case.

The following day, Ms. Lewinsky and Mr. Jordan had
breakfast together at the Park Hyatt Hotel.  According
to Ms. Lewinsky, she told Mr. Jordan that a friend of
hers, Linda Tripp, was involved in the Jones case. She
told Mr. Jordan: "I used to trust [Ms. Tripp], but I
didn't trust her any more." Ms. Lewinsky said that
Ms. Tripp might have seen some notes in her
apartment. Mr. Jordan asked: "Notes from the President
to you?" Ms. Lewinsky responded: "No, notes from me to
the President." According to Ms. Lewinsky, Mr. Jordan
said: "Go home and make sure they're not there." Ms.
Lewinsky testified that she understood that Mr. Jordan
was advising her to "throw . . . away" any copies or
drafts of notes that she had sent to the President.

After breakfast, Mr. Jordan gave Ms. Lewinsky a ride
back to his office. When Ms. Lewinsky returned home to
her apartment that day, she discarded approximately 50
draft notes to the President.

E. January 4: The Final Gift

On Sunday, January 4, 1998, Ms. Lewinsky called Ms.
Currie at home and told her that she wanted to drop off
a gift for the President. Ms. Currie invited Ms.
Lewinsky to her home, and Ms. Lewinsky gave her the
package. The package contained a book entitled The
Presidents of the United States and a love note
inspired by the movie Titanic.

           XIII. January 5-January 16, 1998:

                     The Affidavit

On January 5, 1998, Ms. Lewinsky's attorney, Francis
Carter, drafted an affidavit for Ms. Lewinsky in an
attempt to avert her deposition. She spoke with the
President that evening. On January 6, Ms. Lewinsky
talked to Mr. Jordan about the affidavit, which denied
any sexual relations between her and the President. On
January 7, Ms. Lewinsky signed the affidavit. On
January 8, she interviewed for a job in New York
City. After the interview went poorly, Mr. Jordan
placed a phone call to the company's chairman on her
behalf, and Ms. Lewinsky was given a second
interview. The following week, after Ms. Lewinsky told
Ms. Currie that she would need a reference from the
White House, the President asked Chief of Staff Erskine
Bowles to arrange one.

A. January 5: Francis Carter Meeting

At 3:00 p.m. on Monday, January 5, 1998, Ms. Lewinsky
met with Mr. Carter at his office for approximately one
hour.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that Mr. Carter described what a
deposition was like and "threw out a bunch of different
questions." The questions that most concerned her
related to the circumstances of her departure from the
White House.

Mr. Carter told Ms. Lewinsky that he would draft an
affidavit for her to sign in hopes of averting her
deposition. They arranged for Ms. Lewinsky to pick up a
draft of the affidavit the next day.

B. January 5: Call from the President

After her meeting with Mr. Carter, Ms. Lewinsky sent
word via Ms. Currie that she needed to speak to the
President about an important matter. Specifically,
Ms. Lewinsky told Ms. Currie she was anxious about
something she needed to sign.

A few hours later, according to Ms. Lewinsky, the
President returned her call. She mentioned an affidavit
she would be signing and asked if he wanted to see
it. According to Ms. Lewinsky, the President responded
that he did not, as he had already seen about fifteen
others. Ms. Lewinsky testified that she told the
President that she was troubled by potential questions
about her transfer from the White House to the
Pentagon. She was concerned that "people at the White
House who didn't like [her]" might contradict her and
"get [her] in trouble." The President, according to
Ms. Lewinsky, advised her: "[Y]ou could always say that
the people in Legislative Affairs got it [the Pentagon
job] for you or helped you get it."

The President acknowledged in the grand jury that he
was aware that Ms. Lewinsky had signed an affidavit in
early January, but had no specific recollection of a
conversation with her in that time period. He testified
that he did not recall telling Ms. Lewinsky that she
could say, if asked, that persons in the Legislative
Affairs Office of the White House had helped her obtain
the job at the Pentagon.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she and the President also
briefly discussed an antique book that she had dropped
off with Ms. Currie the day before. With the book, she
enclosed a letter telling the President that she wanted
to have sexual intercourse with him at least once.  In
their phone conversation, Ms. Lewinsky told the
President, "I shouldn't have written some of those
things in the note." She testified that the President
agreed.

Although the President had testified in the Jones case
that any personal messages from Ms. Lewinsky to him had
been "unremarkable," he told the grand jury that he had
received "quite affectionate" messages from Ms.
Lewinsky, even after their intimate relationship
ended. The President testified that he cautioned
Ms. Lewinsky about such messages: "I remember telling
her she should be careful what she wrote, because a lot
of it was clearly inappropriate and would be
embarrassing if somebody else read it. I don't remember
when I said that. I don't remember whether it was in
'96 or when it was." The President did remember the
antique book Ms. Lewinsky had given him, but said he
did not recall a romantic note enclosed with it.

C. January 6: The Draft Affidavit

According to Ms. Lewinsky, in the afternoon of January
6, 1998, she visited Mr. Carter's office and picked up
a draft of the affidavit. Later that day, according to
Ms. Lewinsky, she and Mr. Jordan discussed the draft by
telephone. Ms. Lewinsky testified that having
Mr. Jordan review the affidavit was like getting it
"blessed" by the President. Ms. Lewinsky testified that
she told Mr. Jordan that she was worried about a
sentence that implied that she had been alone with the
President and thus might incline Paula Jones's
attorneys to question her. She eventually deleted it.

In addition, Paragraph 8 of the draft affidavit
provided in part:

I have never had a sexual relationship with the
President. . . . The occasions that I saw the
President, with crowds of other people, after I left my
employment at the White House in April, 1996 related to
official receptions, formal functions or events related
to the U.S. Department of Defense, where I was working
at the time.

Deeming the reference to "crowds" "too far out of the
realm of possibility," Ms. Lewinsky deleted the
underscored phrase and wrote the following sentence at
the end of this paragraph: "There were other people
present on all of these occasions." She discussed this
proposed sentence, as well as her general anxiety about
Paragraph 8, with Mr. Jordan.

When questioned in the grand jury, Mr. Jordan
acknowledged that Ms. Lewinsky called him with concerns
about the affidavit, but maintained that he told her to
speak with her attorney.

Phone records for January 6 show that Mr. Jordan had a
number of contacts with Ms. Lewinsky, the President,
and Mr. Carter. Less than thirty minutes after
Mr. Jordan spoke by phone to Ms. Lewinsky, he talked
with the President for thirteen minutes. Immediately
after this call, at 4:33 p.m., Mr. Jordan called
Mr. Carter. Less than an hour later, Mr. Jordan placed
a four-minute call to the main White House number. Over
the course of the day, Mr. Jordan called a White House
number twice, Ms.  Lewinsky three times, and Mr. Carter
four times.

Mr. Carter testified that his phone conversations with
Mr. Jordan this day and the next "likely" related to
Ms.  Lewinsky and his litigation strategy for her. In
fact, Mr. Carter billed Ms. Lewinsky for time for
"[t]elephone conference with Atty Jordan."

When questioned in the grand jury, Mr. Jordan testified
that he could not specifically remember the January 6
calls. He said he "assumed" that he talked with Ms.
Lewinsky about her job search, and he believed that he
called Mr. Carter to see "how he was dealing with this
highly emotional lady." He said that he might have
talked with the President about Ms. Lewinsky, but he
maintained that "there [was] no connection" between his
13-minute conversation with the President and the call
he placed immediately thereafter to Mr. Carter.

D. January 7: Ms. Lewinsky Signs Affidavit

Ms. Lewinsky set an appointment with Mr. Carter to
finalize the affidavit for 10 a.m. on January 7,
1998. She signed the affidavit; however, she
acknowledged in the grand jury that statements in it
were false. Mr. Carter indicated to her that he
"intend[ed] to hold onto this until after I talk to
plaintiff's lawyers." He told her to "keep in touch,"
and said: "Good luck on your job search."

According to Mr. Jordan, Ms. Lewinsky came to his
office on January 7 and showed him the signed
affidavit.  Over the course of the day, Mr. Jordan
placed three calls of significant duration to the White
House.  He testified: "I knew the President was
concerned about the affidavit and whether it was signed
or not."  When asked whether the President understood
that the affidavit denied a sexual relationship,
Mr. Jordan testified: "I think that's a reasonable
assumption." According to Mr. Jordan, when he informed
the President that Ms. Lewinsky had signed the
affidavit, the President said, "Fine, good." Mr.
Jordan said he was continuing to work on her job, and
the President responded, "Good."

Ten days after this conversation, in the Jones
deposition, President Clinton was asked whether he knew
that Ms. Lewinsky had met with Vernon Jordan and talked
about the Jones case. He answered:

I knew he met with her. I think Betty suggested that he
meet with her. Anyway, he met with her. I, I thought
that he talked to her about something else. I didn't
know that -- I thought he had given her some advice
about her move to New York. Seems like that's what
Betty said.

In his grand jury appearance, however, President
Clinton testified that Mr. Jordan informed "us" on
January 7 that Ms. Lewinsky had signed an affidavit to
be used in connection with the Jones case. The
President defended his deposition testimony by stating:

[M]y impression was that, at the time, I was focused on
the meetings. I believe the meetings he had were
meetings about her moving to New York and getting a
job.

I knew at some point that she had told him that she
needed some help, because she had gotten a
subpoena. I'm not sure I know whether she did that in a
meeting or a phone call. And I was not, I was not
focused on that. I know that, I know Vernon helped her
get a lawyer, Mr.  Carter. And I, I believe that he did
it after she had called him, but I'm not sure. But I
knew that the main source of their meetings was about
her move to New York and her getting a job.

E. January 8: The Perelman Call

The day after she signed the affidavit, January 8,
1998, Ms. Lewinsky interviewed in New York with Jaymie
Durnan, Senior Vice President and Special Assistant to
the Chairman at MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings, Inc.
(MFH). Mr. Durnan testified that, although impressive,
Ms. Lewinsky was not suited for any MFH opening. He
told her that he would pass on her resume to Revlon, an
MFH company. Ms. Lewinsky called Mr. Jordan and
reported that she felt that the interview had gone
"very poorly." Mr. Jordan indicated in response that
"he'd call the chairman."

At 4:54 p.m., Mr. Jordan called Ronald Perelman,
chairman and chief executive officer of MFH. Mr.
Jordan told the grand jury with respect to
Mr. Perelman, one "[c]an't get any higher -- or any
richer."  Asked why he chose to call Mr. Perelman,
Mr. Jordan responded: "I have spent a good part of my
life learning institutions and people, and, in that
process, I have learned how to make things happen. And
the call to Ronald Perelman was a call to make things
happen, if they could happen."

According to Mr. Perelman, Mr. Jordan spoke of "this
bright young girl, who I think is terrific," and said
that he wanted "to make sure somebody takes a look at
her." Mr. Perelman testified that, in the roughly
twelve years that Mr. Jordan had been on Revlon's Board
of Directors, he did not recall Mr. Jordan ever calling
to recommend someone.

After he spoke with Mr. Perelman, Mr. Jordan telephoned
Ms. Lewinsky and told her, "I'm doing the best I can to
help you out." Ms. Lewinsky soon received a call from
Revlon, inviting her to another interview.

Over the course of January 8, Mr. Jordan placed three
calls to the White House -- twice to a number at the
White House Counsel's Office, once to the main White
House number. As to the Counsel's Office calls, Mr.
Jordan speculated that he was trying to reach Cheryl
Mills, Deputy White House Counsel, to express his
"frustration" about Ms. Lewinsky. According to Mr.
Jordan, Ms. Mills knew who Ms. Lewinsky was: "[T]hat
was no secret, I don't think, around the White House,
that I was helping Monica Lewinsky."

F. January 9: "Mission Accomplished"

On the morning of Friday, January 9, 1998, Ms. Lewinsky
interviewed with Allyn Seidman, Senior Vice President
of MFH, and two individuals at Revlon. Ms. Lewinsky
testified that the interviews went well and that Ms.
Seidman called her back that day and "informally
offered [her] a position, and [she] informally
accepted."

Ms. Lewinsky then called Mr. Jordan and relayed the
good news. When shown records of a seven-minute call at
4:14 p.m., Mr. Jordan testified: "I have to assume that
if she got the job and we have a seven-minute
conversation and the day before I had talked to the
chairman [Ronald Perelman], I have to assume the Jordan
magic worked."

According to Mr. Jordan, he believed that he notified
Ms. Currie and the President as soon as he learned that
Ms. Lewinsky had obtained an offer: "I am certain that
at some point in time I told Betty Currie, 'Mission
accomplished.'" Mr. Jordan testified that he also told
the President directly that, "'Monica Lewinsky's going
to work for Revlon,' and his response was, 'Thank you
very much.'"

G. January 12: Pre-Trial Hearing in Jones Case

On January 12, 1998, Judge Wright held a hearing in the
Jones case to discuss pre-trial issues, including the
President's upcoming deposition. At that hearing, Judge
Wright required Ms. Jones's counsel to list all the
witnesses that they planned to call at trial. Ms.
Jones's witness list named many women, among them Ms.
Lewinsky, to support her theory that the President had
a pattern of rewarding women based on their willingness
to engage in sexual relations with him. At the hearing,
Judge Wright indicated that she would permit Ms. Jones
to call as witnesses some of the women she listed in
support of her case.

H. January 13: References from the White House

On Tuesday, January 13, 1998, Jennifer Sheldon, Manager
of Corporate Staffing of Revlon, called Ms. Lewinsky
and formally extended her a position as a public
relations administrator. Asked whether this was a
relatively quick hiring process, Ms. Sheldon responded,
"In totality of how long open positions normally stay
open, yes. This was pretty fast." Ms. Sheldon told
Ms. Lewinsky that she needed to send her some
references.

According to Ms. Lewinsky, she then called Ms. Currie
because she was "concerned that if I put [Mr. Hilley]
down as a reference, he might not say flattering things
about me." At 11:11 a.m. on January 13, Ms. Currie
paged Ms. Lewinsky and left the following message:
"Will know something this afternoon. Kay."

That day, January 13, the President talked with Chief
of Staff Erskine Bowles about a reference for Ms.
Lewinsky. The President told Mr. Bowles that Ms.
Lewinsky "had found a job in the . . . private sector,
and she had listed John Hilley as a reference, and
could we see if he could recommend her, if asked."
Mr. Bowles assured the President that Mr. Hilley would
give Ms.  Lewinsky a recommendation commensurate with
her job performance.

Thereafter, Mr. Bowles took the President's request to
Mr. Podesta, the Deputy Chief of Staff, who in turn
spoke with Mr. Hilley. Mr. Hilley responded that,
because he did not know Ms. Lewinsky personally, he
would have his office write a recommendation. It would
be a generic letter, simply confirming the dates of
employment, because of the less than favorable
circumstances surrounding Ms. Lewinsky's departure from
the White House.

Ms. Lewinsky testified that Ms. Currie called later
that day and told her that "Mr. Podesta took care of it
and everything would be fine with Mr. Hilley." At 11:17
a.m. the next day, Wednesday, January 14, Ms.  Lewinsky
faxed her acceptance to Revlon and listed John Hilley
and her Defense Department supervisor as references.

The President was asked in the grand jury whether he
ever spoke to Mr. Bowles about obtaining a reference
from Mr. Hilley for Ms. Lewinsky. He testified that he
did, at Ms. Lewinsky's request, although he thought he
had done so earlier than January 13 or 14.

I. January 13: Final Jordan Meeting

According to Ms. Lewinsky, on Tuesday, January 13, she
stopped by Mr. Jordan's office to drop off some
thank-you gifts for helping her find a
job. Ms. Lewinsky offered to show him a copy of her
signed affidavit in the Jones case, but he indicated
that he did not need to see it.

J. January 13-14: Lewinsky-Tripp Conversation and
Talking Points

In a face-to-face conversation on January 13, Ms.
Lewinsky told Linda Tripp: "This is what my lawyer
taught me. You really don't -- you don't very often say
'no' unless you really need to. The best is, 'Well, not
that I recall, not that I really remember. Might have,
but I don't really remember.'" Ms. Lewinsky said that,
if asked in a deposition, "Were you ever alone with the
President?" she could say, "Um, it's possible I may
have taken a letter on the weekend, but, you know -- I
might have, but I don't really. . . ."

Ms. Lewinsky and Ms. Tripp then discussed the
situation:

Ms. Lewinsky: I don't think the way that man thinks, I
don't think he thinks of lying under oath. . . .

Ms. Tripp: Yes, he is because he's the one who said,
"Deny, deny, deny." Of course he knows.

Ms. Lewinsky: Right. But it's -- hard to explain this.
It's like -- (sigh)

Ms. Tripp: You know what I mean. I mean, I don't know
-- do I think he is consciously --

Ms. Lewinsky: If-- if -- if I said, if somebody said to
him, "Is Monica lying under oath," he would say
yes. But when he on his own thinks about it, he doesn't
think about it in those terms. Okay?

Ms. Tripp: Probably.

Ms. Lewinsky: Okay? He thinks of it as, "We're safe.
We're being smart." Okay? "We're being smart, we're
being safe, it's good for everybody."

On January 14, Ms. Lewinsky gave Ms. Tripp a three-page
document regarding "points to make in [Ms. Tripp's]
affidavit." Ms. Lewinsky testified that she wrote the
document herself, although some of the ideas may have
been inspired by conversations with Ms.  Tripp.

K. January 15: The Isikoff Call

In the grand jury, Betty Currie testified that on
Thursday, January 15, 1998, she received a telephone
call from Michael Isikoff of Newsweek, who inquired
about courier receipts reflecting items sent by Ms.
Lewinsky to the White House.

Ms. Currie called Mr. Jordan and asked for guidance in
responding to Mr. Isikoff's inquiry because, in her
words, she had a "comfort level with Vernon."  After
Ms. Currie arranged to meet with Mr. Jordan at his
office, Ms. Lewinsky drove her there.

Mr. Jordan confirmed in the grand jury that Ms. Currie
expressed concern about a call from Mr. Isikoff.  He
invited her to his office but advised her to "talk to
Mike McCurry and Bruce Lindsey . . . because I cannot
give you that advice."

In a recorded conversation that day, January 15, Ms.
Lewinsky encouraged Ms. Tripp not to disclose her
(Lewinsky's) relationship with the President. Ms.
Lewinsky tried to persuade Ms. Tripp to lie by telling
her that others planned to lie: "I'm not concerned all
that much anymore because I'm not going to get in
trouble because you know what? The story I've signed
. .  . under oath is what someone else is saying under
oath."  When Ms. Tripp asked, "Who?" Ms. Lewinsky
responded: "He will," referring to the
President. Ms. Lewinsky stated that she did not think
the President would "slip up" at his deposition because
she was not a "big issue" like Gennifer Flowers and
Paula Jones. In contrast, she regarded herself as
nothing more than "rumor and innuendo."

One of Ms. Lewinsky's friends, Natalie Ungvari,
testified that, when Ms. Lewinsky was implicated in the
Jones case, "it seemed to me that Monica was just
confident everybody would say the right thing, that
everything would be orchestrated to come out a secret."

L. January 15-16: Developments in the Jones Law Suit

On January 15, 1998, President Clinton's counsel served
Ms. Jones's attorneys with the President's responses to
Ms. Jones's document requests. One of the requests
specifically sought all documents reflecting
communications between the President and Monica
Lewinsky. President Clinton objected to the scope of
this request, but, notwithstanding his objection, he
stated that he did not have any responsive documents.

Also on January 15, Mr. Carter drafted a motion to
quash the subpoena issued by Paula Jones's attorneys to
Ms.  Lewinsky. Attached to the motion was
Ms. Lewinsky's signed affidavit. At the request of
Katherine Sexton, one of the President's personal
attorneys, Mr.  Carter faxed a copy of the affidavit to
her law offices.  Mr. Carter testified that he asked
Ms. Sexton why she needed the affidavit that day:

I said, "Well, Katie, you're going to get it tomorrow
because I'm filing it, and it's going to be attached as
an exhibit to the motion." She said, "Well, but you've
already provided it to the other side, so can I get a
copy" -- words to that effect. I said, "I have no
problem." And so I faxed it to her.

On January 16, 1998, Mr. Carter arranged for the
overnight delivery of the motion to quash and the
accompanying affidavit to Judge Susan Webber Wright's
law clerk and Paula Jones's attorneys.

            XIV. January 17, 1998-Present:

             The Deposition and Afterward

The President was asked a number of questions about Ms.
Lewinsky during his January 17, 1998, deposition in the
Jones case. In sworn testimony, the President denied
having a sexual affair or sexual relations with her.
That evening, the President called Ms. Currie and asked
her to meet him the following day to discuss Ms.
Lewinsky. After allegations that the President had an
affair with a White House intern became public, the
President emphatically denied the reports to aides and
to the American public.

A. January 17: The Deposition

On Saturday, January 17, 1998, the President testified
under oath at a deposition in the Jones case.  Judge
Susan Webber Wright traveled from Little Rock,
Arkansas, to preside at the deposition in Washington,
D.C.

Prior to any questions, Judge Wright reminded the
parties about her standing Protective Order. She
specifically stated: "[I]f anyone reveals anything
whatsoever about this deposition,

. . . it will be in violation of the Protective Order.
This includes the questions that were asked, . . . You
may acknowledge that [the deposition] took place, but
that is it." Judge Wright accepted the following
definition of the term "sexual relations:"

For the purposes of this deposition, a person engages
in "sexual relations" when the person knowingly engages
in or causes . . . contact with the genitalia, anus,
groin, breast, inner thigh, or buttocks of any person
with an intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire
of any person . . . . "Contact" means intentional
touching, either directly or through clothing.

After the President had answered a few questions about
Ms. Lewinsky, his attorney, Robert Bennett, urged Judge
Wright to limit further inquiries. Mr. Bennett stated
that Ms. Lewinsky had executed an affidavit "saying
that there is absolutely no sex of any kind of any
manner, shape or form, with President Clinton." When
Judge Wright cautioned Mr. Bennett not to make remarks
that "could be arguably coaching the witness,"
Mr. Bennett represented to Judge Wright: "In
preparation of the witness for this deposition, the
witness is fully aware of Ms. Lewinsky's affidavit, so
I have not told him a single thing he doesn't know
. . . ." President Clinton, who was present when
Mr. Bennett made his objection, did not contradict his
attorney's comment.  Rejecting Mr. Bennett's argument,
Judge Wright permitted the questioning about
Ms. Lewinsky to continue.

Over the course of extensive questioning, the President
testified that he had seen Ms. Lewinsky "on two or
three occasions" during the government shutdown in the
fall of 1995, including one occasion when she brought
pizza to him, and one or two other occasions when she
delivered documents to him. He could not recall whether
he had been alone with Ms. Lewinsky on such occasions,
although he acknowledged that it was possible. The
President further testified that he could not remember
the subject of any conversations with Ms. Lewinsky.

President Clinton recalled that he received only a
couple of unremarkable personal messages from Ms.
Lewinsky, and he could not recall ever having received
a cassette tape from her. He received presents from her
"[o]nce or twice" -- a book or two and a tie.  The
President originally testified that he could not recall
any gifts he might have given her; later in the
deposition, however, he remembered that some
merchandise he had purchased from a Martha's Vineyard
restaurant might have reached her through
Ms. Currie. The President stated that he might have
given Ms. Lewinsky a hat pin, though he could not
recall for certain.

The President testified that his last conversation with
Ms. Lewinsky had been before Christmas, when she had
visited the White House to see Ms. Currie. The
President stated: "I stuck my head out, said hello to
her."  He said it was also possible that, during that
encounter, he had joked with Ms. Lewinsky that the
plaintiff's attorneys were going to subpoena "every
woman I ever talked to" and Ms. Lewinsky "would
qualify."

The President testified that he was unaware that Mr.
Jordan had talked with Ms. Lewinsky about the Jones
case, in which she had also been subpoenaed to testify
at a deposition.

The President emphatically denied having had sexual
relations with Ms. Lewinsky.

At the conclusion of the deposition, Judge Wright said:
"Before [the President] leaves, I want to remind him,
as the witness in this matter, and everyone else in the
room, that this case is subject to a Protective Order
regarding all discovery, . . . and . . . all parties
present, including . . . the witness are not to say
anything whatsoever about the questions they were
asked, the substance of the deposition, . . . any
details, . .  . and this is extremely important to this
Court."

Sometime after the President's deposition, Mr. Podesta
saw Bruce Lindsey, Deputy White House Counsel, at the
White House and inquired how the deposition went.
According to Mr. Podesta, Mr. Lindsey said that the
President had been asked about Monica Lewinsky.
Mr. Lindsey testified that, during a break in the
President's deposition, the President had told him that
Ms. Lewinsky's name had come up.

That same evening, Mr. Lindsey met with the President
in the Oval Office, where they discussed the
deposition. Mr. Lindsey, relying on the
attorney-client, presidential communication,
deliberative process, and work-product privileges,
declined to say what specifically was discussed at this
meeting.

B. The President Meets with Ms. Currie

Soon after the deposition, the President called Ms.
Currie and asked her to come to the White House the
next day. Ms. Currie acknowledged that, "It's rare for
[the President] to ask me to come in on Sunday."  The
President wanted to discuss Ms. Lewinsky's White House
visits.

At approximately 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, January 18, 1998,
Ms. Currie met with the President. The meeting took
place at her desk outside the Oval Office.  According
to Ms. Currie, the President appeared "concerned." He
told Ms. Currie that, during his deposition the
previous day, he had been asked questions about Monica
Lewinsky. Ms. Currie testified: "I think he said,
'There are several things you may want to know.'" He
proceeded to make a series of statements, one right
after the other:

   * "You were always there when she was there, right?"
   * "We were never really alone."
   * "Monica [Lewinsky] came on to me, and I never
     touched her, right?"
   * "You can see and hear everything, right?"

Ms. Currie testified that, based on his demeanor and
the way he made the statements, the President wanted
her to agree with them.

Ms. Currie testified that she did, in fact, agree with
the President when he said, "You were always there when
she was there, right?" Before the grand jury, however,
Ms. Currie acknowledged the possibility that
Ms. Lewinsky could have visited the President when she
was not at the White House.

With respect to whether the President was "never really
alone" with Ms. Lewinsky, Ms. Currie testified that
there were several occasions when the President and Ms.
Lewinsky were either in the Oval Office or in the study
without anyone else present.

Ms. Currie explained that she did not consider the
President and Ms. Lewinsky to be "alone" on such
occasions because she was at her desk outside the Oval
Office; accordingly, they were all together in the same
"general area." Ms. Currie testified that "the
President, for all intents and purposes, is never
alone.  There's always somebody around him."

As to whether Ms. Lewinsky "came on" to him, Ms. Currie
testified that she "would have no reason to know"
whether Ms. Lewinsky ever "came on" to the President
because Ms. Currie was not present all the time.
Finally, as to whether she "could see and hear
everything," Ms. Currie testified that she should not
have agreed with the President. She testified that when
the President and Ms. Lewinsky were alone together in
the study, while Ms. Currie was at her desk, she could
"hear nothing."

The President also made the following statement during
their January 18, 1998 meeting, according to
Ms. Currie: "[Monica Lewinsky] wanted to have sex with
me, but I told her I couldn't do that."

When the President was questioned about this meeting
with Ms. Currie in the grand jury, he testified that he
recalled the conversation, but he denied that he was
"trying to get Betty Currie to say something that was
untruthful." Rather, the President testified that he
asked a "series of questions" in an effort to quickly
"refresh [his] memory." The President explained: "I
wanted to establish . . . that Betty was there at all
other times in the complex, and I wanted to know what
Betty's memory was about what she heard, what she could
hear . . . . [a]nd I was trying to figure [it] out
. . .  in a hurry because I knew something was up."

In his grand jury testimony, the President acknowledged
that, "in fairness," Ms. Currie "may have felt some
ambivalence about how to react" to his statements.  The
President maintained that he was trying to establish
that Ms. Currie was "always there," and could see and
hear everything. At the same time, he acknowledged that
he had always tried to prevent Ms. Currie from learning
about his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky.  "[I] did
what people do when they do the wrong thing. I tried to
do it where nobody else was looking at it."

The President was also asked about his statement that
Ms. Currie was always in the Oval Office when Ms.
Lewinsky visited. He explained that he may have
intended the term "Oval Office" to include the entire
Oval Office complex. The President further explained,
"I was talking about 1997. I was never, ever trying to
get Betty Currie to claim that on the occasions when
Monica Lewinsky was there when she wasn't anywhere
around, that she was." When asked whether he restricted
his remarks to the year 1997, the President responded,
"Well, I don't recall whether I did or not, but . . . I
assumed [Ms. Currie] knew what I was talking about."

When questioned about his statement to Ms. Currie, "you

could see and hear everything," the President
responded:

My memory of that was that, that she had the ability to
hear what was going on if she came in the Oval Office
from her office. And a lot of times, you know, when I
was in the Oval Office, she just had the door open to
her office. Then there was -- the door was never
completely closed to the hall. So, I think there was --
I'm not entirely sure what I meant by that, but I could
have meant that she generally would be able to hear
conversations, even if she couldn't see them. And I
think that's what I meant.

Finally, when asked about his statement to Ms. Currie
that "Monica came on to me and I never touched her,"
the President refused to answer.

C. January 18-19: Attempts to Reach Ms. Lewinsky

In the wake of her Sunday afternoon session, Ms. Currie
paged Ms. Lewinsky four times. She testified that the
President "may have asked me to call [Ms. Lewinsky] to
see what she knew or where she was or what was
happening." Later that evening, at 11:02 p.m., the
President called Ms. Currie to ask whether she had
spoken to Ms. Lewinsky.

Over a two-hour span the next morning, Monday, January
19, 1998, Ms. Currie made eight unsuccessful attempts
to contact Ms. Lewinsky, by either pager or
telephone. After speaking with the President to let him
know that she was unable to reach Ms. Lewinsky,
Ms. Currie again paged her. The purpose of these calls,
according to Ms. Currie, was to tell Ms. Lewinsky that
her name had been mentioned in the President's
deposition.

Mr. Jordan also tried unsuccessfully to reach Ms.
Lewinsky that morning. That afternoon, Mr. Jordan met
with the President in the Oval Office. Later,
Ms. Lewinsky's attorney, Frank Carter, called
Mr. Jordan and told him that Ms. Lewinsky had obtained
new counsel, William Ginsburg and Nathaniel
Speights. Mr.  Jordan passed this information on to the
President that evening in a seven-minute phone
conversation.

D. January 20-22: Lewinsky Story Breaks

After the publication of an article alleging a sexual
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky, President Clinton
conferred with his attorneys and issued a number of
denials to his aides and to the American public.

1. "Clinton Accused"

On Wednesday, January 21, 1998, the Washington Post
published a story entitled "Clinton Accused of Urging
Aide to Lie; Starr Probes Whether President Told Woman
to Deny Alleged Affair to Jones's Lawyers." The White
House learned the essentials of the Post story on the
night of January 20, 1998.

President Clinton placed a number of phone calls that
night and the following morning. From 12:08 a.m.  to
12:39 a.m., he spoke with his personal attorney, Robert
Bennett. Mr. Bennett would be quoted in the Post
article as saying, "The President adamantly denies he
ever had a relationship with Ms. Lewinsky and she has
confirmed the truth of that." He added: "This story
seems ridiculous and I frankly smell a rat."

Immediately after his call to Mr. Bennett, President
Clinton called Deputy White House Counsel Bruce
Lindsey; they spoke for about half an hour, until 1:10
a.m.

At 1:16 a.m., the President called Ms. Currie at home
and spoke to her for 20 minutes. Ms. Currie testified
that the President was concerned that her name was
mentioned in the Post article. Soon after this call,
the President called Mr. Lindsey.

A few hours later, at approximately 6:30 a.m., the
President called Mr. Jordan in New York City to tell
him, according to Mr. Jordan, that the Post story was
untrue. From 7:14 a.m. to 7:22 a.m., the President
spoke again with Mr. Lindsey.

Responding to the Post story that day, the White House
issued a statement, personally approved by the
President, declaring that he was "outraged by these
allegations" and that "he has never had an improper
relationship with this woman." White House spokesperson
Mike McCurry said that the statement "was prepared by
the Counsel's office, and I reviewed it with the
President to make sure that it reflected what he wanted
me to say . . . He looked at it, and he said
fine. . . .  It was prepared in consultation between
the lawyers and the President. The Counsel's Office
gave it to me. I wanted to, of course, verify that
that's exactly what the President wanted me to say."

2. Denials to Aides

According to Mr. Lindsey, the remainder of the morning
was spent in a series of meetings about the Lewinsky
matter, including preparing the President for
anticipated Lewinsky-related questions in three
previously scheduled media interviews. At these
meetings, President Clinton denied the allegations to
several of his top aides.

The President met with Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles,
along with his two deputies, John Podesta and Sylvia
Matthews. According to Mr. Bowles, the President told
them, "I want you to know I did not have sexual
relationships with this woman, Monica Lewinsky. I did
not ask anybody to lie. And when the facts come out,
you'll understand." The President made a similar denial
that morning to Harold Ickes, his former Deputy Chief
of Staff. The President also discussed the matter with
Ms. Currie for a second time.  According to Ms. Currie,
the President called her into the Oval Office and gave
a "sort of a recapitulation of what we had talked about
on Sunday -- you know, 'I was never alone with her' --
that sort of thing." The President spoke with the same
tone and demeanor that he used during his previous
session with her. Ms.  Currie testified that the
President may have mentioned that she might be asked
about Ms. Lewinsky.

Later that day, the President summoned Sidney
Blumenthal to the Oval Office. They spoke for about 30
minutes. The President said to Mr. Blumenthal, "I
haven't done anything wrong." Mr. Blumenthal testified
that the President told him, "Monica Lewinsky came on
to me and made a sexual demand on me." The President
said that he "rebuffed her." The President also told
Mr. Blumenthal that Ms. Lewinsky had "threatened
him. She said that she would tell people they'd had an
affair, that she was known as the stalker among her
peers, and that she hated it and if she had an affair
or said she had an affair then she wouldn't be the
stalker any more." Mr. Blumenthal then asked the
President whether he and Ms. Lewinsky were alone when
she threatened him. The President responded, "Well, I
was within eyesight or earshot of someone."

According to Mr. Blumenthal, the President complained:
"I feel like a character in a novel. I feel like
somebody who is surrounded by an oppressive force that
is creating a lie about me and I can't get the truth
out. I feel like the character in the novel Darkness at
Noon."

Soon thereafter, in the course of a meeting about the
progress of the President's State of the Union address,
the President made a second denial of the allegations
to Mr. Podesta. Mr. Podesta testified:

[H]e said to me that he had never had sex with her, and
that -- and that he never asked -- you know, he
repeated the denial, but he was extremely explicit in
saying he never had sex with her . . . . Well, I think
he said -- he said that -- there was some spate of, you
know, what sex acts were counted, and he said that he
had never had sex with her in any way whatsoever --
that they had not had oral sex.

The President was asked during his grand jury
appearance whether he recalled denying a sexual
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky to his senior aides and
advisors, including Mr. Bowles, Mr. Podesta,
Mr. Blumenthal, Mr. Ickes, and Mr. Jordan. The
President did not recall specific details but did
remember the following:

I met with certain people, and [to] a few of them I
said I didn't have sex with Monica Lewinsky, or I
didn't have an affair with her or something like
that. I had a very careful thing I said, and I tried
not to say anything else . . . . I remember that I
issued a number of denials to people that I thought
needed to hear them, but I tried to be careful and to
be accurate.

                         * * *

And I believe, sir, that -- you'll have to ask them
what they thought. But I was using those terms in the
normal way people use them.

The President testified that he had said "things that
were true about this relationship. That I used -- in
the language I used, I said, there's nothing going on
between us. That was true. I said I did not have sex
with her as I defined it. That was true." The President
qualified this answer, however: "I said things that
were true. They may have been misleading, and if they
were I have to take responsibility for it, and I'm
sorry."

3. Initial Denials to the American Public

On the afternoon of January 21, the President made his
first of a series of previously scheduled media
appearances. In an interview on National Public Radio's
"All Things Considered," the following colloquy took
place:

Q: Mr. President, . . . . [m]any Americans woke up to
the news today that the Whitewater independent counsel
is investigating an allegation that you
. . . encouraged a young woman to lie to lawyers in the
Paula Jones civil suit. Is there any truth to that
allegation?

WJC: No, sir, there's not. It's just not true.

Q: Is there any truth to the allegation of an affair
between you and the young woman?

WJC: No. That's not true either. . . . The charges are
not true. And I haven't asked anybody to lie.

That evening, the President appeared on the PBS program
"The News Hour with Jim Lehrer." He was asked again
whether the allegation of an affair with a White House
intern was true. The President replied, "That is not
true. That is not true. I did not ask anyone to tell
anything other than the truth. There is no improper
relationship. And I intend to cooperate with this
inquiry. But that is not true." When asked to define
what he meant by the term "improper relationship," the
President answered, "Well, I think you know what it
means. It means that there is not a sexual
relationship, an improper sexual relationship, or any
other kind of improper relationship."

The following morning, on January 22, 1998, the
President again denied he had done anything improper.
Speaking at a televised White House photo opportunity
with Palestinian Authority Chairman Yasser Arafat, the
President stated: "[T]he allegations are false, and I
would never ask anybody to do anything other than tell
the truth. That is false."

The President also gave an interview to Roll Call that
day. He stated: "[T]he relationship was not improper,
and I think that's important enough to say. . . . But
let me answer -- it is not an improper relationship and
I know what the word means. . . . The relationship was
not sexual. And I know what you mean, and the answer is
no."

At each of these interviews, the President pledged he
would cooperate fully with the investigation. On NPR,
the President stated: "I have told people that I would
cooperate in the investigation, and I expect to
cooperate with it. I don't know any more about it,
really, than you do. But I will cooperate. . . . I'm
doing my best to cooperate with the investigation." To
Mr. Lehrer, he said: "[W]e are doing the best to
cooperate here, but we don't know much yet. . . . I
think it's important that we cooperate, I will
cooperate, but I want to focus on the work at hand."

In his photo opportunity with Mr. Arafat, the President
stated:

[T]he American people have a right to get answers. We
are working very hard to comply, get all the requests
for information up here. And we will give you as many
answers as we can, as soon as we can, at the
appropriate time, consistent with our obligation to
also cooperate with the investigations. And that's not
a dodge; that's really what I've -- I've talked with
our people. I want to do that. I'd like for you to have
more rather than less, sooner rather than later. So we
will work through it as quickly as we can and get all
those questions out there to you."

Finally, in his Roll Call interview, the President
vowed: "I'm going to cooperate with this investigation.
. . . And I'll cooperate."

4. "We Just Have To Win"

Amidst the flurry of press activity on January 21,
1998, the President's former political consultant, Dick
Morris, read the Post story and called the
President. According to Mr. Morris, he told the
President, "You poor son of a bitch. I've just read
what's going on." The President responded, Mr.  Morris
recalled, "Oh, God. This is just awful. . . . I didn't
do what they said I did, but I did do something.  I
mean, with this girl, I didn't do what they said, but I
did . . . do something. . . . And I may have done
enough so that I don't know if I can prove my
innocence. . . . There may be gifts. I gave her gifts,
.  . . . [a]nd there may be messages on her phone
answering machine."

Mr. Morris assured the President, "[t]here's a great
capacity for forgiveness in this country and you should
consider tapping into it." The President said, "But
what about the legal thing? You know, the legal thing?
You know, Starr and perjury and all. . . . You know,
ever since the election, I've tried to shut myself
down. I've tried to shut my body down, sexually, I
mean.  . . . But sometimes I slipped up and with this
girl I just slipped up."

Mr. Morris suggested that he take a poll on the voters'
willingness to forgive confessed adultery. The
President agreed.

Mr. Morris telephoned the President later that evening
with the poll results, which showed that the voters
were "willing to forgive [the President] for adultery,
but not for perjury or obstruction of justice[.]" When
Mr. Morris explained that the poll results suggested
that the President should not go public with a
confession or explanation, he replied, "Well, we just
have to win, then."

The President had a follow-up conversation with Mr.
Morris during the evening of January 22, 1998, when Mr.
Morris was considering holding a press conference to
"blast Monica Lewinsky 'out of the water.'" The
President told Mr. Morris to "be careful". According to
Mr. Morris, the President warned him not to "be too
hard on [Ms. Lewinsky] because there's some slight
chance that she may not be cooperating with Starr and
we don't want to alienate her by anything we're going
to put out."

Meanwhile, in California, the President's good friend
and Hollywood producer, Harry Thomason, had seen the
President's interview with Jim Lehrer on
televison. Mr. Thomason, who had occasionally advised
the President on matters relating to the media,
traveled to Washington, D.C., and met with him the next
day. Mr. Thomason told the President that "the press
seemed to be saying that [the President's comments
were] weak" and that he, Mr. Thomason, "thought his
response wasn't as strong as it could have been."
Mr. Thomason recommended that the President "should
explain it so there's no doubt in anybody's mind that
nothing happened." The President agreed: "You know,
you're right. I should be more forceful than that."

In the ensuing days, the President, through his
Cabinet, issued a number of firm denials. On January
23, 1998, the President started a Cabinet meeting by
saying the allegations were untrue. Afterward, several
Cabinet members appeared outside the White House.
Madeline Albright, Secretary of State, said: "I believe
that the allegations are completely untrue." The others
agreed. "I'll second that, definitely," Commerce
Secretary William Daley said. Secretary of Education
Richard Riley and Secretary of Health and Human
Services Donna Shalala concurred.

The next day, Ann Lewis, White House Communications
Director, publicly announced that "those of us who have
wanted to go out and speak on behalf of the president"
had been given the green light by the President's legal
team. She reported that the President answered the
allegations "directly" by denying any improper
relationship. She believed that, in issuing his public
denials, the President was not "splitting hairs,
defining what is a sexual relationship, talking about
'is' rather than was. You know, I always thought,
perhaps I was naive, since I've come to Washington,
when you said a sexual relationship, everybody knew
what that meant." Ms. Lewis expressly said that the
term includes "oral sex."
